 
 
 
CSAF PERSPECTIVE ON DOCTRINE 
 
Our Nation needs an Air Force that can fly, fight, and win as part of the joint team. 
Commanders must articulate intent and prepare to take the initiative in dynamic, 
contested environments. Doctrine offers an agreed upon, operationally relevant body of 
best practices and principles that articulates how we fight, captures our airpower 
experience, and guides how we operate within a joint force. It provides a starting point, 
so we don’t reinvent the wheel with every operation and allows us to continue to be the 
world’s most capable Air Force.  
 
In today's complex global security environment, victory goes to the rapid integrator of 
ideas. These ideas are driven by training and the distilled knowledge all Airmen bring to 
the fight. I’m relying on every Airman to innovate and incorporate concepts and 
technologies that will develop new best practices to shape future doctrine. We must 
prioritize and make difficult choices as we field a lethal, resilient, and rapidly adapting 
joint force. Leaders must push decisions to the lowest competent, capable level using 
doctrine as a foundation for sound choices. 
 
Doctrine is an opportunity to educate, empower, and prepare for the future fight. It 
guides us, but does not bind us. I’m relying on every Airman to understand the lessons 
of doctrine, and then draw on them to innovate and incorporate concepts and 
technologies that will develop new best practices to shape future doctrine. This is how 
we solve difficult problems, make necessary changes, and how we accelerate change in 
our Air Force. 
 
The tools in doctrine provide an excellent opportunity to build our foundation for future 
Airmen and forge unbeatable airpower for our Nation. Airmen should read, understand, 
contemplate, and prepare for the full spectrum of operations, from competition to armed 
conflict. Never forget General LeMay’s words: “At the very heart of warfare lies 
doctrine.”  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHARLES Q. BROWN, JR. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
General, USAF 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force 
 
 
XX MONTH YEAR 
 
 
PREFACE 
 
Air Force doctrine is the extant and emerging best practices in the application of 
airpower. Doctrine describes the operations and activities that create convergence of 
effects across the competition continuum. Doctrine is organized as basic, operational, 
and tactical level doctrine. Basic doctrine states the most fundamental and enduring 
beliefs describing airpower and the Airman’s perspective. Operational doctrine 
describes more detailed organization of forces and applies the principles of basic 
doctrine to military actions. Tactical doctrine is contained in Air Force and Multi-Service 
Tactics, Techniques, and Procedures publications. 
 
Blue underlined text denotes a hyperlink to another source document, normally Air 
Force or joint operational doctrine, for additional discussion.  
 
Air Force Doctrine Publication (AFDP) 1, The Air Force, forms the basis of our Service 
culture. It defines airpower, as the ability to project military power through control 
and exploitation in, from and through the air. Airpower is employed to achieve joint 
force commander (JFC) objectives in support of the National Defense Strategy (NDS). 
 
AFDP 1 addresses four fundamental topics: 
 
 Why We Fight - War: our foundational purpose as a Service. 
 
 Who We Are - Airmen: our values. 
 
 What We Do - Airpower: airpower fundamentals and perspective. 
 
 How We Do It - Tenets of Airpower: airpower employment considerations. 
 
Ideas presented here enable Airmen to describe what the Air Force provides to 
joint all-domain operations (JADO). 
 
 
 
Air Force Doctrine Publication 1, The Air Force 
 
Table of Contents 
 
Chapter 1 – WHY WE FIGHT: WAR .......................................................... 1 
NATURE OF WAR .................................................................................. 1 
LEVELS OF WARFARE .......................................................................... 1 
AIRPOWER IN THE COMPETITION CONTINUUM ................................ 2 
NATIONAL DEFENSE STRATEGY & OBJECTIVES ............................. 2 
Chapter 2 – WHO WE ARE: AIRMEN ....................................................... 4 
Chapter 3 – WHAT WE DO: AIRPOWER .................................................. 6 
DESCRIPTION OF AIRPOWER .............................................................. 6 
FOUNDATIONS OF AIRPOWER ............................................................ 7 
AIRPOWER FROM AN AIRMAN’S PERSPECTIVE ............................... 8 
Chapter 4 – HOW WE DO IT: TENETS OF AIRPOWER ......................... 11 
MISSION COMMAND ............................................................................ 12 
SYNERGISTIC EFFECTS...................................................................... 14 
PERSISTENCE ...................................................................................... 15 
CONCENTRATION................................................................................ 15 
PRIORITY .............................................................................................. 15 
BALANCE ............................................................................................. 15 
CONCLUSION .......................................................................................... 16 
 
Air Force Doctrine Publication 1, The Air Force 
1 
 
Chapter 1 – WHY WE FIGHT: WAR 
 
NATURE OF WAR 
 
War is one of the means used by nation-states, sub-national groups, or supranational 
groups to achieve their objectives. Conducting war from the air underpins the reason for 
the Air Force’s existence. Airpower is an instrument of national power and can be 
employed in warfare. There are three basic truths that the Air Force believes are 
fundamental to warfare: 
 
 War is an extension of politics by other means. War has been described as a 
violent clash of interests characterized by the use of force. The Air Force conducts 
warfare as an extension of our national policy. 
 
 War is a complex and chaotic human endeavor. Uncertainty and unpredictability, 
sometimes called the “fog of war”, combine to create what Clausewitz called 
“friction” which makes simple operations unexpectedly, and sometimes even 
insurmountably, difficult. The tenets of airpower help Airmen apply airpower 
effectively within this environment. 
 
 War is a clash of opposing wills. War is a collision of two or more forces, 
producing a dynamic interplay of action and reaction. The will of the people and the 
character of their leaders are critical components of warfare.  
 
Sound doctrine, good leadership, effective organization, moral values, and 
realistic training can reduce the effects of uncertainty, unpredictability, and 
unreliability present in war. 
 
LEVELS OF WARFARE 
 
Airpower creates effects across all three levels of warfare: strategic, operational, and 
tactical. The strategic level of war defines why and with what the conflict occurs. The 
operational level of war determines what courses of action, in what order, and for what 
In our victory over Japan, airpower was unquestionably 
decisive. That the planned invasion of the Japanese 
Home islands was unnecessary is clear evidence that 
airpower has evolved into a force in war co-equal with 
land and sea power, decisive in its own right and worthy 
of the faith of its prophets. 
General Carl A. Spaatz, 1st Chief of Staff, 
United States Air Force 
Air Force Doctrine Publication 1, The Air Force 
2 
 
duration forces are employed in the conflict. Finally, the tactical level of war defines how 
we create the operational effects. Actions in war occur at the tactical level, but an 
understanding of the operational and strategic implications of those actions is key to the 
employment of airpower in pursuit of our national objectives. 
 
AIRPOWER IN THE COMPETITION CONTINUUM 
The Air Force employs forces in pursuit of our national objectives across the 
competition continuum. Rather than the traditional binary classifications of peace and 
war, the competition continuum describes a world of enduring competition conducted 
through a mixture of cooperation, competition below armed conflict, and armed conflict. 
The Air Force creates effects across the continuum through the conduct of operations, 
military engagement, security cooperation, deterrence, and other activities.  
 
For detailed discussion on the competition continuum, see Joint Doctrine Note 1-19, 
Competition Continuum, 3 June 2019. 
 
NATIONAL DEFENSE STRATEGY & OBJECTIVES 
The National Defense Strategy sets the context in which Airmen must anticipate and 
plan across the competition continuum. Long-term strategic competition and the 
expansion of our adversary’s military capabilities threaten the United States’ prosperity 
Air Force Doctrine Publication 1, The Air Force 
3 
 
and security. Joint force operations are increasingly interconnected, interdependent, 
and challenged. Our adversary’s anti-access and area denial focus and proliferation of 
advanced technologies create contested environments that reduce airpower’s ability to 
conduct global operations across the competition continuum, reduce freedom of 
maneuver, and challenge the Air Force’s ability to operate. This operating environment 
requires examining how forces will sense, plan, decide, and act in concert across all 
domains.  
 
The National Defense Strategy delivers the framework that defines the Department of 
the Air Force’s functions. The Air Force, as part of the Department of the Air Force, 
provides the Nation with global vigilance, global reach, and global power. Service 
doctrine describes how to fulfill that responsibility. 
 
 Global Vigilance is the ability to gain and maintain awareness anywhere; to provide 
warning and to determine intent, opportunity, capability, or vulnerability; then to fuse 
this information with data received from other Services or agencies and use and 
share relevant information with the joint force commander (JFC). 
 
 Global Reach is the ability to project military capability responsively–with 
unsurpassed velocity and precision–anywhere, and provide mobility to rapidly 
supply, position, or reposition joint forces. 
 
 Global Power is the ability to hold at risk or strike any target anywhere, assert 
national sovereignty, safeguard joint freedom of action, and create swift, decisive, 
precise effects. 
 
The Air Force prepares and employs forces within this strategic environment to achieve 
our national objectives. These objectives include defend the homeland, remain the 
preeminent military power in the world, ensure the balances of power remain in our 
favor, and advance an international order that is most conducive to our security and 
prosperity. When the Air Force mobilizes in the pursuit of these objectives, they are 
integrated as a part of the joint force, led by a JFC. 
 
The Air Force organizes, trains, and equips forces to be an air component to a JFC. As 
part of the joint force’s air component, our forces must be prepared to accomplish JFC 
objectives. The air component commander’s administrative authorities are derived from 
Title 10, U.S. Code and exercised as the commander, Air Force forces (COMAFFOR). 
The air component commander’s operational authorities are delegated from the JFC 
and exercised as both the COMAFFOR, over Air Force Forces, and as the functional 
joint force air component commander (JFACC), over joint air forces made available for 
tasking. Thus, the air component commander leads Air Force forces as the 
COMAFFOR and the JFC’s joint air operations as the JFACC. This duality of authorities 
is expressed in the axiom: Airmen work for Airmen and the senior Airman works for the 
JFC. 
 
 
 
Air Force Doctrine Publication 1, The Air Force 
4 
 
Chapter 2 – WHO WE ARE: AIRMEN 
All Airmen support and defend the Constitution of the United States and live by 
Air Force core values. Historically, the term Airman is associated with uniformed 
members of the US Air Force (officer or enlisted; regular, Reserve, or Guard) regardless 
of rank, component, or specialty.1 Today, Air Force civilians and members of the Civil 
Air Patrol, when conducting missions as the official Air Force Auxiliary, are incorporated 
within the broader meaning of the term, Airman. 
 
Airmen espouse Air Force core values: 
 
 Integrity first. 
 
 Service before self. 
 
 Excellence in all we do. 
 
Success hinges on the incorporation of these values into the character of every Airman. 
Air Force core values are a commitment each Airman makes when joining the Air Force. 
They provide a foundation for leadership, decision-making, and success, no matter their 
rank, the difficulty of the assigned task, or the dangers presented by the mission. 
 
Every Airman is a leader and positively influences others to accomplish the mission. 
Leadership is the art and science of motivating, influencing, and directing Airmen to 
understand and accomplish JFC objectives.2 Two fundamental elements of leadership 
are the mission and the Airmen who accomplish it. Effective leadership transforms 
human potential into effective performance in the present and prepares capable leaders 
for the future. Airmen step forward to lead others in accomplishing the mission while 
simultaneously serving as followers. You can be a commander without being a leader, 
 
1 This broader meaning does not, however, mean or imply that anyone other than uniformed members of 
the US Air Force are members of the Armed Services in other contexts. For example, in the context of 
punitive Air Force instructions or law of war regulations, care must be taken to ensure the rights and 
obligations imposed under those regulations are not uniformly applied to both Service members and 
civilians. 
2 Air Force Manual 35-15, Air Force Leadership (1948): “Leadership is the art of influencing people to 
progress with cooperation and enthusiasm toward the accomplishment of a mission.” Air Force Pamphlet 
35-49, Air Force Leadership (1985): “Leadership is the art of influencing and directing people to 
accomplish the mission.” The definition in the text is a distillation of these earlier efforts. 
Our Airmen are the competitive edge we have over our 
adversaries and the reason we are the world’s greatest 
Air Force. 
JoAnne S. Bass, 19th Chief Master Sergeant of the Air Force 
Air Force Doctrine Publication 1, The Air Force 
5 
 
or you may be a fine leader without a command, but you must be a good leader to be 
an effective commander.3  
 
Airmen understand the attributes of airpower and should apply airpower with an 
appreciation for the breadth, scope, and uniqueness it brings to joint all-domain 
operations. Airpower is fundamentally distinct from other forms of military power. Its 
inherent flexibility allows it to be applied independently or in concert with other forms of 
military power. Airmen have a distinct point of view forged from air operations 
throughout history and our unique operating domains.  
 
 
 
 
3 Concept dates to AFM 35-15 pg 4 (1948).  
I’m firmly convinced that leaders are not born; they’re educated, trained, and 
made, as in every other profession. To ensure a strong, ready Air Force, we 
must always remain dedicated to this process. 
 
General Curtis E. LeMay, 5th Chief of Staff, United States Air Force 
Air Force Doctrine Publication 1, The Air Force 
6 
 
Chapter 3 – WHAT WE DO: AIRPOWER 
 
DESCRIPTION OF AIRPOWER 
 
Airpower is defined as the ability to project military power through control and 
exploitation in, from and through the air. Elevation above the earth’s surface 
provides relative advantages and creates a mindset that sees competition from a broad 
perspective. The air domain allows Airmen to exploit airpower’s attributes of speed, 
range, precision, tempo, lethality, and adaptability to create effects in all domains. 
These attributes of airpower change the dynamics of competition in ways that enhance 
the effectiveness of joint forces through greater mobility and responsiveness. Airmen 
have an appreciation for airpower’s broad potential. Airmen do not view or study 
airpower as an auxiliary or complementary capability subordinate to another Service. 
Airmen view their expertise in the application of airpower as the main reason for the 
Service’s existence. The Air Force employs airpower to achieve JFC objectives and to 
complement other components of the joint force. 
 
The attributes of airpower create effects throughout the operational environment and 
competition continuum. Airmen apply airpower by bypassing geographical limitations or 
striking with precision at critical vulnerabilities within adversary centers of gravity 
(COGs) at long ranges, on short notice, and for sustained periods. Airpower can control 
the tempo of operations in our favor and leaders employ airpower in concert with all 
forms of military power. Airmen integrate capabilities across multiple domains to create 
effects in support of JFC objectives through joint all-domain operations. While all 
Services rely heavily on such integration, joint all-domain integration is fundamental to 
how Airmen employ airpower as part of the joint force. 
 
To enable convergence of effects in all domains, Airmen support JADO by conducting 
operations principally in, from, and through: 
 
 The air domain, defined as “the atmosphere, beginning at the Earth’s surface, 
extending to the altitude where its effects upon operations become negligible.” 
 
 The Information Environment (IE), which includes the cyberspace domain. The IE is 
“the aggregate of individuals, organizations, and systems that collect, process, 
Regardless of our respective ranks and positions, we 
must execute to the best of our abilities and we must do 
it right the first time because the application of airpower 
is serious business where half-hearted efforts and 
playing for second place are not options. 
 
General Charles Q. Brown, Jr.,  
22d Chief of Staff, United States Air Force 
Air Force Doctrine Publication 1, The Air Force 
7 
 
disseminate, or act on information,” while cyberspace consists of “the 
interdependent networks of information technology infrastructures and resident data, 
including the Internet, telecommunications networks, computer systems, and 
embedded processors and controllers.” The effective use of information as an 
instrument for affecting perceptions and behaviors and to support human and 
automated decision-making is an increasingly important element of joint operations. 
 
 The electromagnetic spectrum (EMS) is defined as “the entire range of 
electromagnetic radiation.”  It is critical for connecting the joint force and as a 
medium for creating effects, freedom of action in the EMS at the time, place, and 
parameters of the joint force’s choosing, is a required precursor to the successful 
conduct of operations in all domains. 
 
A comprehensive understanding of operations within the warfighting domains, the EMS, 
and IE are critical to achieving JFC objectives. 
 
 
FOUNDATIONS OF AIRPOWER 
 
The evolution of airpower stems from the Airman’s original vision of combat from a 
distance, bypassing the force-on-force clash of surface combat. Originally manifested in 
long-range aircraft delivering kinetic weapons, airpower has evolved to include other 
global capabilities, notably non-kinetic forces and capabilities that can produce lethal or 
non-lethal effects. Airpower evolution accelerated as technological advancements 
allowed Airmen to conduct a greater percentage of operations globally versus 
regionally.  
 
The other Services have air arms—magnificent air 
arms—but their air arms must fit within their Services, 
each with a fundamentally different focus. So those air 
arms, when in competition with the primary focus of 
their Services, will often end up on the short end, 
where the priorities for resources may lead to shortfalls 
or decisions that are suboptimum. It is therefore 
important to understand that the core competencies of 
[airpower] are optional for the other Services. They can 
elect to play or not play in that arena. But if the nation 
is to remain capable and competent in air and space 
[sic], someone must pay attention across the whole 
spectrum; that is why there is a US Air Force. 
General Ronald R. Fogleman, 15th Chief of Staff, 
United States Air Force 
Air Force Doctrine Publication 1, The Air Force 
8 
 
Airpower has successfully influenced strategic political outcomes outside of armed 
conflict since the Berlin Airlift of 1948. Throughout the Cold War, and continuing under 
various international arms control agreements, Air Force assets have observed and 
verified compliance, leveraging our national ability to negotiate and influence diplomacy. 
 
The Air Force provides JFCs options across the competition continuum, which may 
accomplish objectives without the application of lethal force. Airpower has the ability to 
respond rapidly to crises anywhere in the world with flexible options that contribute to 
global influence and stability, and communicate US capabilities and resolve to 
worldwide audiences. Examples include: 
 
 The deterrent role played by the Air Force’s nuclear-armed bombers and 
intercontinental ballistic missiles against the existential threat posed by adversaries’ 
strategic forces. 
 
 The role mobility forces play in humanitarian assistance and disaster response 
worldwide. 
 
 Aviation foreign internal defense by Air Force Special Operations combat aviation 
advisors, to build partner capacity and help them protect their societies from 
subversion, insurgency, or extremism. 
 
Airmen apply the foundations of airpower across the competition continuum; translate 
the benefits of airpower into meaningful objectives and desired effects; and influence 
the overall joint planning and execution effort. As experts in the joint application of 
airpower, the Airman’s perspective provides the ability to force multiple dilemmas on 
adversaries, decreasing their decision space for potential courses of action. 
 
AIRPOWER FROM AN AIRMAN’S PERSPECTIVE 
Effective airpower application requires an Airman’s unique perspective. Airmen gained 
this perspective through a century of air operations experience. These distilled truths 
should be at the forefront of an Airman’s perspective when operating with joint partners. 
 
 Control of the air is a necessary precondition for control of the surface. The 
first mission of an air force is to defeat or neutralize the enemy airpower so friendly 
operations in all domains can proceed. 
 
 Airpower creates effects at the strategic level of warfare. Airpower, through 
global reach and global power, can hold an enemy’s strategic COGs and critical 
vulnerabilities at risk immediately and continuously through kinetic or non-kinetic 
means. Airpower also has capability for nonlethal strategic influence, as in 
humanitarian relief and building partnership activities. 
 
 Airpower exploits the principles of mass and maneuver simultaneously. There 
are no natural boundaries to prevent air capabilities from quickly concentrating 
Air Force Doctrine Publication 1, The Air Force 
9 
 
(physically or in terms of delivered effects) at any point. Airpower can dominate the 
fourth dimension—time—and compress events to produce physical and 
psychological shock. 
 
 Airpower applies force against many facets of enemy power. Global power 
enables airpower to be brought to bear against any lawful target in an enemy system 
simultaneously or separately. It enables rapid expression of our national will 
wherever and whenever necessary. 
 
 Airpower is not bound by geographical operating areas and creates effects 
throughout a theater. Airmen view the application of force more from a functional 
than geographic standpoint and classify targets by generated effects rather than 
physical location. 
 
 Airpower’s attributes combine to make it one of the most versatile 
components of military power. Its versatility allows it to be rapidly employed 
against strategic, operational, and tactical objectives and in support of multiple 
theaters simultaneously.  
 
 The choice of appropriate capabilities is a key aspect in the realization of 
airpower. Achieving the full potential of airpower requires timely, actionable 
intelligence and sufficient command and control (C2) capabilities to permit 
commanders to exploit airpower attributes.  
 
 Airpower is a critical component of operations in the information environment. 
All Air Force actions, including written or spoken words and displayed or related 
images, have informational aspects that communicate some message or intent, 
which can be leveraged to support the achievement of JFC objectives. Shaping and 
leveraging those messages are integral to operations and planning. 
 
 Airpower provides more than lethal effects. Global vigilance enables airpower to 
alleviate crises and provide a visible symbol of international support and power 
projection. Assisting partner nations, building alliances and the perception of credible 
airpower, supports deterrence and assurance activities that lead to greater regional 
stability and security. 
 
 Airpower requires protection and sustainment to enable air operations and 
requires effective integration of capabilities, people, weapons, bases, 
logistics, and supporting infrastructure. No single aspect of airpower should be 
treated in isolation since all elements are essential and interdependent. The Air 
Force depends on Airmen who command, operate, and sustain forces in any 
environment including chemical, biological, radiological, and nuclear. The Air Force’s 
combat support capability and agile combat employment provide the ability to deploy 
globally, begin operations, and sustain the initiative. Counterair and force protection 
capabilities provide defense for forces. Airpower supports and is supported by 
Air Force Doctrine Publication 1, The Air Force 
10 
 
military power in other domains, from other components, and from other Services. 
 
 Airpower’s unique attributes necessitate it be centrally controlled by an 
Airman. Experience has shown the Air Force to be the preferred choice of JFCs to 
exercise command and control (C2) over the joint air effort. Airmen tend to take a 
broad view of competition; their focus is on applying airpower to accomplish the 
JFC’s objectives. Airmen apply airpower through the tenet of mission command. 
 
 
 
Air Force Doctrine Publication 1, The Air Force 
11 
 
Chapter 4 – HOW WE DO IT: TENETS OF AIRPOWER 
 
The application of airpower is 
refined by its tenets: 
 
 Mission Command. 
 
 Flexibility and versatility. 
 
 Synergistic effects. 
 
 Persistence. 
 
 Concentration. 
 
 Priority. 
 
 Balance. 
 
These tenets reflect the unique 
aspects of airpower and 
complement principles of joint 
operations. The Air Force 
recognizes unity of effort as the 
13th principle to highlight its 
importance.4 While the principles 
provide general guidance on the 
application of military force, the 
tenets provide specific 
considerations for the 
employment of airpower.  
Like principles of joint 
operations, airpower tenets 
 
4 Joint doctrine recognizes Unity of Effort as a “common operating precept.” See Joint Publication 3-0, 
Joint Operations. 
Principles of Joint Operations (JP 3-0) 
Unity of command – purpose is to ensure unity of effort under one 
responsible commander for every objective. 
Objective - purpose is to direct every military operation toward a 
clearly defined, decisive, and achievable goal. 
Offensive – purpose of action is to seize, retain, and exploit the 
initiative. 
Mass - purpose is to concentrate the effects of combat power at the 
most advantageous place and time to produce decisive results. 
Maneuver - purpose is to place the enemy in a position of 
disadvantage through the flexible application of combat power. 
Economy of force - purpose is to expend minimum essential 
combat power on secondary efforts to allocate maximum combat 
power on primary efforts. 
Security - purpose is to prevent the enemy from acquiring 
unexpected advantage. 
Surprise - purpose is to strike at a time or place or in a manner for 
which the enemy is not prepared. 
Simplicity - purpose is to increase the probability that plans and 
operations will be executed as intended by preparing clear, 
uncomplicated plans, and concise orders. 
Restraint - purpose is to prevent the unnecessary use of force. 
Perseverance - purpose is to ensure the commitment necessary to 
achieve national objectives. 
Legitimacy - purpose is to maintain legal and moral authority in the 
conduct of operations. 
Unity of Effort (additional Air Force principle) - purpose is to 
ensure that a wide range of agencies operating during a 
contingency coordinate their resources and focus on the same goal. 
Strategic air assault is wasted if it is dissipated piecemeal in 
sporadic attacks between which the enemy has an 
opportunity to readjust defenses or recuperate. 
Henry H. Arnold, General of the Air Force 
Air Force Doctrine Publication 1, The Air Force 
12 
 
require informed judgment in application. Airmen tailor the application of tenets to 
the operational environment. The competing demands of the principles and tenets (for 
example mass versus economy of force, concentration versus balance, and priority 
versus objective) require an Airman’s nuanced understanding to strike the required 
balance. Competition is interactively complex, and no two operations are identical. 
Airmen apply professional judgment and experience as they employ airpower. 
 
MISSION COMMAND 
 
The Airman’s philosophy for the C2 of airpower is mission command. Mission 
command is an approach to C2 that empowers subordinate decision-making for 
flexibility, initiative, and responsiveness in the accomplishment of commander’s intent. 
Mission command provides Airmen operating in environments of increasing 
uncertainty, complexity, and rapid change with the freedom of action needed to exploit 
emergent opportunities and succeed. Given the global reach and strategic effects of 
airpower, the Air Force’s approach to mission command balances the need for tactical 
flexibility with the management of global risks. Core principles of mission command are: 
 
 Build teams through mutual trust. Built over time through shared experiences, 
mutual trust is shared confidence between commanders, subordinates, and partners 
that they can be relied on and are competent to carry out the mission. 
 
 Create shared understanding. A common understanding of the environment that 
includes an operation’s purpose, challenges, and ways of solving them equips 
decision-makers at all levels with the insight and foresight needed to make effective 
decisions and manage associated risks. 
 
 Provide clear commander’s intent. A clear and concise expression of the purpose 
of an operation, the desired outcome, and acceptable risks provides focus and helps 
subordinate and supporting commanders succeed, even when events do not unfold 
as planned. Commander’s intent succinctly describes what constitutes success. 
 
 Use mission-type orders (MTOs) when appropriate. An 
MTO is an order that contributes to the accomplishment of the 
total mission assigned to the higher headquarters; it does not 
necessarily specify how tasks are to be accomplished. Mission 
type orders focus on the purpose of an operation rather than 
the details of how to accomplish it. They empower 
subordinates with the greatest possible freedom of action 
within the guidelines of commander’s intent. MTOs are most 
applicable and effective when there is a reasonable 
expectation that the assumptions captured in commander’s 
intent will remain valid during execution. MTOs should be 
based on higher-level headquarters priorities and intent, 
nested within the five-paragraph order format, which can be adapted and applied to 
peer and lower echelons. The planning orders (PLANORDs), operation orders 
USAF Modified  
Five-Paragraph Order 
Format (JP 5-0) 
1. Situation 
2. Mission 
3. Execution 
4. Force Sustainment 
5. Command, Signal 
and Communications 
Air Force Doctrine Publication 1, The Air Force 
13 
 
(OPORDs), joint air operation plan (JAOP), and the air operations directive (AOD), 
should serve as foundational documents for issuing MTOs.  
 
 Exercise disciplined initiative. Disciplined initiative is the proactive application of 
inventiveness and creativity when existing orders no longer fit the situation or when 
unforeseen threats or opportunities arise. It is informed by a clear understanding of 
mission objectives, desired effects, overall commander’s intent, and broader 
strategic context. 
 
 Accept prudent risk. All military operations contain uncertain, complex, and 
ambiguous elements. Commanders must analyze risks in collaboration with their 
subordinates to balance the tension between protecting the force and accepting and 
managing risks that must be taken to accomplish the mission. 
 
Airmen execute mission command through centralized command, distributed 
control, and decentralized execution. Centralized command is the organizing 
standard for the effective and efficient means of employing airpower; it enables the 
principle of mass while maintaining the principle of economy of force. Because of 
airpower’s potential to directly affect the strategic and operational levels of warfare, it 
should be commanded by a single Airman, the air component commander. Distributed 
control exploits airpower’s flexibility and versatility to ensure that it remains responsive, 
survivable, and sustainable. Decentralized execution is the delegation of authority to 
achieve effective span of control, foster disciplined initiative, and empower subordinates 
to exploit fleeting opportunities. 
 
Centralized command gives the commander the responsibility and authority for 
planning, directing and coordinating a military operation using the C2 philosophy of 
mission command. Centralized command is best accomplished by an Airman at the 
functional component commander level who maintains a broad focus on the JFC’s 
objectives to direct, integrate, prioritize, plan, coordinate and assess the use of airpower 
across the competition continuum. Centralized command empowers the air component 
commander to respond to changes in the environment and enables priority and balance 
while still allowing subordinate echelons to exercise initiative. Centralized command 
promotes effectiveness and preserves flexibility and versatility at the operational level. 
 
Distributed control enables commanders to delegate planning and coordination 
activities to dispersed locations or subordinate echelons in order to achieve an effective 
span of control. The benefits inherent in distributed control and decentralized execution 
are maximized when clearly communicated commander’s intent guides subordinate 
actions. Distributed control allows subordinate commanders to respond to changes in 
the operational environment and take advantage of fleeting opportunities. Contested 
environments may require a greater degree of distributed control than uncontested 
environments. Commanders should empower subordinates at the lowest capable level 
through MTOs, and with command by negation rather than micromanagement. 
Air Force Doctrine Publication 1, The Air Force 
14 
 
Decentralized execution is the delegation of authority to achieve effective span of 
control and foster disciplined initiative at the tactical level. It allows subordinates to 
exploit fleeting opportunities in dynamic situations. To achieve decentralized execution, 
the air component commander and subordinate echelons use MTOs with clearly 
communicated commander’s intent to empower front-line decision makers (e.g., strike 
package leaders, air battle managers, forward air controllers) to make effective on-
scene decisions during complex, rapidly unfolding operations. Decentralized execution 
promotes effectiveness and resilience at the tactical level.  
 
The balance among centralization, distribution, and decentralization is situationally 
dependent. Some situations (e.g., high-value targets, time-sensitive targets, political 
sensitivities, covert/clandestine operations, offensive cyberspace operations, nuclear 
employment) may require a level of centralized execution of specific operations, most 
notably when the JFC wants to control strategic effects and manage risks at the 
sacrifice of tactical efficiency. In all cases, commanders balance overall execution 
against the need for tactical resilience and effectiveness. 
 
The effectiveness of airpower depends on Airmen ensuring assets are employed 
efficiently and effectively to achieve commander’s intent. Operations in denied, 
degraded, and disrupted environments require flexible and adaptive Airmen who 
maintain unity of effort by exercising the philosophy of mission command, based on 
trust, shared awareness, and shared intent. 
 
FLEXIBILITY AND VERSATILITY 
 
Although often used interchangeably, flexibility and versatility are different. 
 
Flexibility is the ability for airpower to seamlessly transition between mission sets while 
simultaneously exploit the principles of mass and maneuver. Flexibility allows airpower 
to shift from one JFC objective to another, quickly and decisively; to re-role assets 
quickly from a preplanned mission to support an unanticipated need. 
 
Versatility is the ability to employ airpower effectively at the strategic, operational, and 
tactical levels of warfare and provide a wide variety of tasks in concert with other joint 
force elements. Airpower has the potential to achieve synergy through asymmetric and 
parallel operations. 
 
SYNERGISTIC EFFECTS 
 
The proper application of a coordinated force across multiple domains can produce 
effects that exceed the contributions of forces employed individually. An objective of 
modern warfare is the precise, coordinated application of the various elements of 
military power to bring disproportionate pressure on adversaries. This synergistic effect 
forces adversaries to comply with our national will (affecting their intent) or to cause 
functional defeat of their forces (affecting their capability). Airpower allows commanders 
Air Force Doctrine Publication 1, The Air Force 
15 
 
to observe adversaries which enables JFCs to counter enemy movements with 
unprecedented speed and agility. 
 
PERSISTENCE 
 
Airpower operations are often conducted continuously against a broad spectrum of 
objectives. Its attributes allow forces to visit and revisit multiple targets without 
occupying terrain or remaining in proximity to areas of operation to bring force upon 
targets. Persistence denies an adversary an opportunity to seize the initiative or to 
directly accomplish assigned tasks. 
 
CONCENTRATION 
 
Focusing overwhelming power at a decisive time and place is a warfighting imperative, 
supported by the principles of mass and economy of force. The flexibility and versatility 
of airpower with its attributes and persistence makes it an attractive option for 
concentration. The demand for airpower often exceeds the available forces and Airmen 
should guard against the inadvertent dilution of airpower effects resulting from this high 
demand. 
 
PRIORITY 
 
Commanders should prioritize the use of airpower. Limited resources require that 
airpower be applied where it can make the greatest contribution to the most critical JFC 
objectives. The air component commander should assess the possible use of forces, 
analyze their strengths and capabilities to support the overall joint campaign, and have 
an informed dialogue with the JFC regarding effective prioritization of airpower. The 
application of airpower is balanced against its ability to conduct simultaneous operations 
at all levels of warfare. 
 
BALANCE 
 
Much of the skill of the air component commander is reflected in the dynamic and 
correct balancing of the principles of joint operations and the tenets of airpower to bring 
Air Force capabilities together to produce synergistic effects. An air component 
commander should weigh combat opportunity, necessity, effectiveness, efficiency, and 
the impact on accomplishing assigned objectives against the associated risk to friendly 
forces. An Airman is uniquely suited to determine the proper theater-wide balance 
between offensive and defensive air operations, and among strategic, operational, and 
tactical applications to best accomplish the JFC’s objectives. 
 
 
 
Air Force Doctrine Publication 1, The Air Force 
16 
 
CONCLUSION 
 
Airmen understand airpower and how to employ it to accelerate change in, from, and 
through the air. Airmen exemplify the core values of integrity, service and excellence, 
and are the foundation of the Air Force. The Air Force and Airmen exist to provide 
expert application of airpower to a JFC across the competition continuum in support of 
the National Defense Strategy. The doctrine presented in this publication and its 
subordinate operational and tactical documents underscore the reason for our existence 
and provide Airmen the basis for success. 
 
At the very heart of warfare lies doctrine. It represents the 
central beliefs for waging war in order to achieve victory. 
Doctrine is of the mind, a network of faith and knowledge 
reinforced by experience which lays the pattern for the 
utilization of [Airmen], equipment, and tactics. It is the 
building material for strategy. It is fundamental to sound 
judgment. 
General Curtis E. LeMay, 5th Chief of Staff, United 
States Air Force 
