AIR FORCE DOCTRINE PUBLICATION 3-0.1 
 
 
 
 
COMMAND AND CONTROL 
22 January 2025 
Air Force Doctrine Publication 3-0.1, Command and Control 
 
Air Force Doctrine Publication 3-0.1, 
 
 
 Command and Control 
 
Table of Contents 
Foreword ......................................................................................................................... i 
Chapter 1: COMMAND AND CONTROL OVERVIEW ................................................... 1 
THE COMMANDER ..................................................................................................... 2 
COMMAND AND CONTROL FRAMEWORK ............................................................. 4 
Chapter 2: THE COMMAND AND CONTROL PROCESS ............................................ 9 
MAJOR COMMAND AND CONTROL ACTIVITIES .................................................. 10 
APPLYING THE COMMAND AND CONTROL PROCESS ....................................... 17 
Chapter 3: COMMAND AND CONTROL SYSTEMS ................................................... 22 
THEATER AFFOR STAFF AND AOC STAFF .......................................................... 22 
THEATER STAFF STRUCTURES ............................................................................ 27 
WING A-STAFF STRUCTURE .................................................................................. 29 
THEATER AIR CONTROL SYSTEM ......................................................................... 31 
COMMAND AND CONTROL TECHNOLOGY .......................................................... 38 
Appendix A: COMMAND AND CONTROL TERMINOLOGY ...................................... 45 
Appendix B: DISTRIBUTED CONTROL CONSIDERATIONS .................................... 50 
Appendix C: COMMAND AND CONTROL ACTIVITY CONSIDERATIONS ............... 52 
Appendix D: BATTLE RHYTHM ORGANIZATION ..................................................... 58 
References ................................................................................................................... 61 
 
Air Force Doctrine Publication 3-0.1, Command and Control 
i 
FOREWORD 
The most pressing objective for the United States Air Force (USAF) doctrine is to equip 
the Service with the intellectual tools necessary to prepare and posture for conflict in an 
era of great power competition. Towards this aim, in 2021 the USAF published its first 
new capstone doctrine in six years, Air Force Doctrine Publication (AFDP) 1, The Air 
Force. Recognizing the Service's increasingly centralized approach to operations was an 
ill fit for peer conflict, the most significant contribution of AFDP 1 was the addition of 
mission command as the central tenet of airpower. The adoption of mission command 
marked a necessary first step in a chain of progression that is spreading across USAF 
doctrine. 
Initially introduced as the Airman's philosophy for the command and control (C2) of 
airpower, mission command was later refined in AFDP 1-1, Mission Command, as a 
philosophy of leadership that empowers Airmen to operate in uncertain, complex, and 
rapidly changing environments through trust, shared awareness, and understanding of 
commander's intent. While closely tied to C2, this more nuanced description draws on 
lessons learned from sister Services, whose adoption of mission command predates our 
own. Consequently, AFDP 1-1 focused on the fundamentals of mission command, 
principles, and the need for a Service culture that supports its practice. 
Continuing this progression, AFDP 3-0.1, Command and Control, presents a 
comprehensive understanding of mission command as it is implemented through the 
framework of Centralized Command-Distributed Control-Decentralized Execution 
(CC-DC-DE). The implications of Distributed Control1 are a dominant focus of this 
publication and differentiate this revision from previous examinations of C2 in USAF 
doctrine. Until now, USAF C2 doctrine detailed the role of the commander, Air Force 
forces (COMAFFOR), discussed force presentation and command relationships 
(COMREL), and detailed the distinct roles and responsibilities of organizations within an 
air operations center (AOC). These topics are now addressed in AFDP 3-0, Operations, 
or remain in their respective tactical source documents. In their place, this document 
presents entirely new content to depict the C2 function through its major elements: a 
commander that makes decisions, the framework for authority delegation, the activities 
of the C2 process, and the systems that enable the direction of forces. 
By presenting C2 through this model, AFDP 3-0.1 forms a complete picture of mission 
command in action. It hones our understanding of Distributed Control by addressing the 
question, “What is distributed, to whom, and for what purpose?” Its answer: 1) authority, 
2) subordinate commanders, and 3) to conduct the C2 process. This evolved approach 
to C2 is applicable to all USAF operations at every echelon of command.
 
1 Throughout this publication, “Distributed Control” is capitalized for emphasis. 
Air Force Doctrine Publication 3-0.1, Command and Control 
1 
CHAPTER 1: COMMAND AND CONTROL OVERVIEW 
Command and control is the exercise of authority and direction by a properly 
designated commander over assigned and attached forces in the accomplishment 
of a mission. C2 is one of the seven joint functions 
that represent a grouping of capabilities and 
activities that enable a joint force commander 
(JFC) to synchronize, integrate, and direct joint 
operations.2 C2 is the central joint function because 
it affects and connects all other functions. It 
enables commanders to coordinate and apply the 
other functions (information, movement and 
maneuver, intelligence, fires, sustainment, and 
protection) to achieve objectives and accomplish 
their mission. 
This publication articulates C2 in the context of mission command to enable the USAF to 
adapt its force presentation in response to great power competition (GPC) and facilitate 
joint all-domain operations (JADO). It provides a common language and 
characterization for C2 that is aligned with Distributed Control. 
THE COMMAND AND CONTROL FUNCTION 
Understanding C2 begins with examining its composition and definition. C2 means 
something different from the two words that form it. Individually, "command” and “control” 
describe authorities and responsibilities entrusted to a commander. In general, 
command is the authority and responsibility to lead an organization to accomplish a 
mission, and control is the authority that empowers a commander to employ forces to 
achieve that mission. 
Together, “command and control” denotes the act of exercising authorities. 
Consequently, C2 encompasses a commander who exercises their authority, a method 
for delegating authorities, the process that translates decisions into actions, and the 
appropriate systems that enable the direction of forces. 
 The commander is the core element of C2. This role is usually filled by the air 
component 
commander. 
The 
air 
component 
commander represents 
the 
centralization of command authority under the joint principle of unity of command. 
 Authority delegation is guided by the framework of CC-DC-DE. 
 The act of C2 is characterized by the C2 process. The C2 process consists of four 
major activities: planning, preparing, executing, and assessing. The C2 process 
captures many different processes and cycles that occur within the air component 
(e.g., the air tasking cycle, targeting cycle, and airlift cycle). Commanders conduct 
the C2 process to command and control assigned and attached forces and 
 
2 For additional information on joint functions, see Joint Publication (JP) 1, Volume 2, The Joint Force. 
 Air Force Doctrine Publication 3-0.1, Command and Control 
2 
conduct operations. 
 C2 systems encompass all C2 resources, including the personnel, facilities, 
equipment, communications, and procedures essential for a commander to C2 
forces pursuant to their assigned mission. 
THE COMMANDER 
The core element of C2 is the commander. Commanders use their authority to make 
decisions and direct action. For air operations, the air component commander has the 
authority, capability, and capacity to conduct the C2 process for assigned operations. 
They balance their time between leading their staffs through the C2 process and providing 
purpose, direction, and motivation to subordinate commanders and leaders. 
THE AIR COMPONENT COMMANDER 
The air component commander’s operational authorities are delegated from the JFC and 
generally exercised as both the COMAFFOR over USAF forces and as the functional joint 
force air component commander (JFACC) over joint air forces made available for tasking. 
JFCs generally delegate the COMAFFOR operational control (OPCON) and the JFACC 
tactical control (TACON). 
However, the authorities delegated to a JFACC by the JFC are not limited to those 
specified under the definitions of OPCON and TACON. JFACC’s are typically given 
additional authorities such as airspace control authority (ACA), and responsibilities such 
as area air defense commander (AADC). Ultimately, the air component commander 
is delegated authorities by the JFC which makes them the focal point of airpower 
C2 by leading USAF forces as the COMAFFOR and joint air operations as the 
JFACC.3  
DECISION CYCLE 
Commanders 
drive 
the 
C2 
process 
through 
understanding, visualizing, deciding, and directing in a 
continuous cycle. The commander uses this cycle to 
process information developed and refined throughout the 
C2 activities and subsequently provides decisions and 
directions that progress the C2 process. The decision cycle 
presented here is representative of other conceptual 
models, 
such 
as 
Colonel 
John 
Boyd’s 
observe-
orient-decide-act (OODA) loop. Regardless of the specific 
model, the purpose of any decision cycle is to make 
decisions with advantageous speed. 
Understand. Understanding is knowledge that has been synthesized and had judgment 
applied to comprehend the situation's inner relationships, enable decision-making, and 
drive action. Success in operations demands timely and effective decisions based on 
 
3 For additional information on the air component commander, see JP 3-30, Joint Air Operations, and AFDP 
3-0, Operations. 
 Air Force Doctrine Publication 3-0.1, Command and Control 
3 
applying judgment to available information and knowledge. As such, commanders and 
staffs seek to build and maintain situational understanding throughout an operation. 
Visualize. As commanders begin to understand their operational environment (OE), they 
start visualizing a desired end-state and potential solutions to solve or manage identified 
problems. Collectively, this is known as commander’s visualization—the mental process 
of developing situational understanding, determining a desired end-state, and envisioning 
an operational approach by which the force will achieve that end-state. Commanders 
generally accomplish visualization during design activities. 
Decide. Commanders make decisions. Timely decisions and actions are essential for 
effective C2. Commanders who demonstrate the agility to consistently make appropriate 
decisions faster than their opponents have a significant advantage by dictating the 
operational tempo and seizing initiative. Commanders use the inputs from the C2 
activities and the other elements of the decision cycle to make decisions and provide 
direction that supports the C2 process. 
Direct. Commanders communicate intent and provide direction to convert decisions into 
actions. The primary means for communicating direction are plans and orders. 
Communicating directions contributes to the mission command principle of building 
shared understanding among subordinates. 
During the C2 process, commanders participate in staff work where it is necessary to 
guide their staffs. They use their situational understanding and commander’s visualization 
to provide guidance from which their staffs produce plans and orders. In deciding when 
and where to direct subordinates, the key is for commanders to determine where they 
can best use their limited time to the greatest effect—where their personal intervention 
will pay the greatest dividend. 
Battle Rhythm. Decision cycles occur at different speeds based on the event horizons 
for their respective operations. A battle rhythm integrates decision cycles together on a 
single time schedule to support the commander at the required speed. 
The air component commander’s battle rhythm is a logical arrangement of boards, 
centers, cells, and working groups or activities with a clearly defined purpose and 
outcome. The JFC establishes a battle rhythm for joint operations, and the air component 
commander and subordinate commanders nest their component battle rhythm as 
appropriate. At the theater-level, the AOC director and Air Force forces (AFFOR) chief of 
staff (COS) often collaborate to develop a synchronized battle rhythm to provide the 
commander a timeline for receiving critical information to establish set decision points.4 
Similarly, subordinate echelons and units of action should create a battle rhythm, 
managed by the COS, to integrate Air Force Service component or unit staff (A-Staff) 
activities. 
 
4 For additional information on battle rhythm and staff integration, see Appendix D and JP 3-33, Joint Force 
Headquarters. 
 Air Force Doctrine Publication 3-0.1, Command and Control 
4 
COMMAND AND CONTROL FRAMEWORK 
A C2 framework is the overarching approach to COMREL and authority delegation. The 
characteristics of the C2 framework influence the act of C2 and shape the structure of C2 
systems. The USAF C2 framework is CC-DC-DE. It is an aspect of the overarching 
mission command philosophy. 
CENTRALIZED COMMAND 
Centralized command gives the commander the responsibility and authority for planning, 
directing, and coordinating USAF forces for joint operations. It facilitates the development 
and delivery of all-domain effects requiring broad perspective, coordination, and reach. 
This promotes effectiveness and preserves flexibility and versatility at the operational 
level while supporting the joint principle of unity of command. Unity of command means 
all forces operate under a single commander with the requisite authority to direct all 
forces employed in pursuit of a common purpose. The definition of unity of command 
helps frame centralized command in the USAF and supports the axiom “Airmen work for 
Airmen and the senior Airman works for the JFC.” 
While the air component commander may distribute control of USAF forces to subordinate 
commanders to conduct operations, overall command responsibility of USAF assets 
remains under a single Airman as expressed in the centralized command aspect of 
mission command and represented by the air component commander reporting directly 
to the JFC on matters of airpower. 
Centralized command of airpower facilitates the integration and synchronization of global 
USAF capabilities that may originate from outside a combatant commander’s (CCDR’s) 
area of responsibility (AOR). The air component commander usually serves as the 
integrator for functional USAF forces from combatant commands (CCMDs) without a 
defined AOR (e.g., United States Transportation Command (USTRANSCOM), United 
States Strategic Command, United States Cyber Command). Therefore, centralized 
command requires specified COMREL and authority delegation to clearly define the role 
of the theater air component commander in the C2 of USAF forces. 
Distributed Control Terminology 
Colloquially, "control" is often used to describe actions such as a tactical air control 
party (TACP) managing close air support or an airborne warning and control 
system (AWACS) aircraft directing aircraft. However, this usage differs from the 
delegation of authority to commanders, as defined in JP 1, Vol 2, The Joint Force. 
For operational doctrine, “control” relates to authority, rather than the 
activity of directing forces. In this example, the AWACS and TACP are 
conducting battle management. For additional information on battle management, 
see the “Execution” topic in Chapter 2. 
 Air Force Doctrine Publication 3-0.1, Command and Control 
5 
DISTRIBUTED CONTROL 
Distributed Control is the delegation of specified authorities from the air 
component commander to subordinate commanders to C2 assigned operations 
(i.e., conduct the C2 process). 
Distributed Control is accomplished according to an air component commander’s design 
for C2 and the requirement to operate in contested, degraded, and operationally limited 
environments. It is not tied to a specific force structure. Instead, the authorities necessary 
to conduct the C2 process are delegated to subordinate commanders who have the 
authority, capability, and capacity to communicate, coordinate, and synchronize forces 
with the superior commander’s intent. This reduces the vulnerabilities associated with 
centralized control while maintaining the air component commander’s broad, theater-wide 
perspective. 
Additionally, Distributed Control is not limited to 
the delegation of OPCON or TACON. It involves 
distributing the necessary portions of an air 
component commander’s command authority 
to subordinate commanders to C2 their 
assigned operations. Therefore, the most 
effective method for distributing control may be 
specified in a written order utilizing the mission-
type order (MTO) technique.5 
As the USAF moves from “centralized control” 
to “Distributed Control” and embraces mission 
command, Airmen need to proliferate a 
standard suite of platforms and systems, 
scalable from the wing- to theater-level, that is 
interoperable with architectures in use by the 
joint force to enable commanders and staffs to 
execute the joint functions their mission 
requires.6 
Conditions-based Authorities. Distributed Control may be enduring or temporary to 
allow execution at multiple echelons. Conditions-based authorities are authorities that are 
often limited in duration and identified in plans approved by authorized commanders to 
facilitate execution that meets commander’s intent. Failure to provide a subordinate with 
sufficient authority to act may inadvertently encourage them to operate beyond limitations. 
Alternatively, providing a subordinate with authority that exceeds situation or mission 
requirements may result in chaotic, uncoordinated operations. Plans and orders should 
clearly delineate Distributed Control and conditions-based authorities. 
 
5 For additional information on orders, see AFDP 1-1, Mission Command, and AFDP 5-0, Planning. 
6 For additional information on C2 systems for Distributed Control, see Chapter 3. 
 Air Force Doctrine Publication 3-0.1, Command and Control 
6 
Distributed Control Continuum. Distributed Control exists on a continuum between 
centralized control and increasingly Distributed Control. In general, the degree of 
distributed control (i.e., the number of echelons below the theater-level where authority is 
delegated to conduct the C2 process) is dependent on the OE and the capability and 
capacity of subordinate echelons to accomplish the entire C2 process. This also means 
the air component commander requires the necessary situational awareness to determine 
if subordinate echelons can conduct their assigned operations in the given OE. These 
factors are represented in the following figure, “Distributed Control Continuum.” 
Operations in contested, degraded, and operationally limited environments generally 
support authority delegation for the C2 process to dispersed locations at the lowest level 
to maintain the initiative. This allows subordinate commanders to respond to changes in 
the OE and exploit emerging opportunities. However, OEs that are not degraded 
generally promote retaining C2 authority at the theater-level because the air component 
commander is usually able to C2 their forces without distributing control. In these 
situations, the air component commander may choose not to distribute control due to 
limitations with the C2 capability and capacity of subordinate echelons. 
 Air Force Doctrine Publication 3-0.1, Command and Control 
7 
There will always be a need for resilient theater-level communications to support global 
integration and dynamic force employment. However, relying exclusively on theater-level 
integration of multi-domain assets presents a vulnerability and targeting opportunity for 
an adversary. Therefore, distributed C2 capabilities that enable subordinate forces to 
build all-domain options in accordance with theater air component commander guidance 
may enable more effective operations in periods of denied or degraded communication 
with the theater air component commander. Ultimately, the degree of Distributed Control 
in an air component is determined by the air component commander after considering the 
authority, capability, and capacity of their subordinate organizations to C2 assigned and 
attached forces and conduct their assigned operation. 
Distributed Control Synopsis 
Distributed Control is delegating the authority to C2 operations. It is part of the 
framework that supports the mission command philosophy to empower 
Airmen to effectively execute decentralized operations. 
 Why: To reduce vulnerabilities during conflict, achieve objectives in 
uncertain, complex, and rapidly changing environments, and enable 
commanders to seize the initiative. 
 Who: Distributed Control starts with the air component commander and 
extends to subordinate commanders. 
 What: The authority to conduct the C2 process. Classifying these 
authorities as OPCON or TACON may be too broad or narrow to meet 
subordinate authority requirements in a degraded environment. 
 Where: Authorities are delegated to a commander subordinate to the air 
component commander. This may occur down to the wing level, or to a 
middle echelon between the wing and theater air component commander 
(e.g., an air expeditionary task force, air task force, or combat wing). 
Regardless of the echelon, the subordinate echelon must be appropriately 
equipped and resourced. 
 When: Distributed Control is accomplished as appropriate, according to 
an air component commander’s COMREL and design for C2. It also 
depends on the authority, capacity, and capability of subordinate 
commanders. Currently, Distributed Control is used on a conditional 
basis, with centralized control through the theater AOC remaining the 
preferred C2 method. However, future operations may increasingly utilize 
Distributed Control with the goal of normalizing it as a standard C2 
construct. 
 Air Force Doctrine Publication 3-0.1, Command and Control 
8 
DECENTRALIZED EXECUTION 
Decentralized execution is the delegation of execution authority to subordinate 
commanders. It is an enduring aspect of air operations and a fundamental aspect of 
mission command. Commanders enable decentralized execution by empowering 
subordinates to make decisions on their behalf and adapt tasks to achieve their intent. In 
decentralized execution, subordinates are acting on the superior commander’s 
authority. The superior commander retains the command responsibility and authority to 
change the purpose of the subordinate’s assigned mission. Subordinates modify their 
assigned tasks to accomplish their commander’s intent. 
While recent combat operations have treated decentralized execution as contracted 
decisions between the commander and subordinates (i.e., “if this, then you can do that”) 
this is not the intent of decentralized execution under the mission command philosophy. 
Modern warfare requires a greater amount of latitude for subordinates in execution. 
Disciplined initiative allows the exploitation of both predictable and unpredicted 
opportunities. Capitalizing on these often-fleeting opportunities requires commanders to 
accept prudent risk and empower subordinates with decision authority by setting 
restraints, constraints, and directing them to act on their behalf. Through decentralized 
execution, commanders tell subordinates their intent and caveat what they cannot 
do (restraints), what they must do (constraints), and then expect them to utilize the 
extent of their authority to achieve mission success. 
Decentralized execution is separate and distinct from Distributed Control. For 
example, decentralized execution empowers C2 nodes to direct aircraft during execution 
and is often categorized as distributed battle management. These nodes operate using a 
commander’s authority in accordance with the commander’s intent. In contrast, 
Distributed Control delegates authority to subordinate commanders enabling them to C2 
assigned operations. Commanders with Distributed Control have more authorities than 
forces executing decentralized operations. 
 
 
Decentralized Execution Example 
Mission commanders in USAF flying operations represent the epitome of 
decentralized execution. Their role is to lead a large and usually multi-platform 
flying mission from tactical planning through execution. While they carry the 
designation “commander,” they do not have command responsibility over the units 
they are leading. Instead, they act on behalf of the air component commander 
(through delegated execution authority), who grants them latitude to build and 
execute the tasks necessary to accomplish the air component commander’s 
designated mission. 
 Air Force Doctrine Publication 3-0.1, Command and Control 
9 
CHAPTER 2: THE COMMAND AND CONTROL PROCESS 
The C2 process is the progressive and iterative series of major C2 activities, led by 
a commander, which characterize the act of command and control. The C2 process 
consists of four major C2 activities: planning, preparing, executing, and assessing. The 
C2 process captures many different processes and cycles that occur within the air 
component (e.g., the air tasking cycle, targeting cycle, and airlift cycle). 
The C2 process provides a common language for understanding command and control 
and communicates the authorities that subordinate commanders need to realize the CC-
DC-DE framework. It models how a commander makes decisions and the major C2 
activities the commander is conducting. See the figure below for a visual depiction of the 
process. In the figure, the commander is central and influential to all activities because 
they make decisions (through the decision cycle) that drive the process. The C2 process 
generally flows clockwise starting with planning, but because operations are continuous, 
each activity occurs both repeatedly and concurrently. All activities are constantly 
undergoing iterative refinement as new information is fed into the process. 
C2 in the Conduct of Operations. In the air component, the C2 process typically occurs 
at the operational level of warfare. Therefore, it may be referred to as “operational C2” 
among Airmen. However, this doctrine avoids the label “operational C2” since the C2 
process is irrespective of the level of warfare. 
The C2 Process 
 Air Force Doctrine Publication 3-0.1, Command and Control 
10 
BACKGROUND 
The evolution of mission command, Distributed Control, and the role of commanders 
below the theater air component has matured the understanding of the C2 function and 
the C2 process. Previously, subordinate commanders relied on centralized C2 from the 
theater air component commander. However, in future operations, lower echelons may 
gain increased responsibility for airpower C2 across the joint functions. 
The C2 process addresses this issue by presenting a holistic collection of C2 activities 
that is simple and scalable. It answers the question: “What is being distributed in 
Distributed Control?” With: “The authority to run the C2 process to conduct assigned 
operations.” 
MAJOR COMMAND AND CONTROL ACTIVITIES 
A commander commands and controls operations through the four major activities of the 
C2 process: planning, preparing, executing, and assessing. These activities are both 
progressive and continuous. 
PLANNING 
Planning is the broad term to describe how Airmen address and solve problems. It is 
generally the first C2 activity conducted by a commander and their staff. The outputs of 
planning provide foundational guidance for the remainder of the C2 process. The planning 
activity includes design. Design and planning are discussed separately, but they are 
inextricably linked. Design is part of planning and planning informs design.7 
Planning. Planning is a problem-solving methodology to understand a situation, 
incorporate the desired end-state from design, and lay out effective ways to create the 
desired future state. Planning at every echelon integrates processes for orderly and 
coordinated problem-solving and decision-making across the competition continuum. 
Planning should incorporate the delegation of authorities necessary to execute 
operations. During preparation and execution, iterative planning adapts to address 
 
7 For additional information on planning and design, see AFDP 5-0, Planning, JP 5-0, Joint Planning, JP 
3-30, Joint Air Operations, and Air Force Tactics, Techniques, and Procedures (AFTTP) 3-3.AOC, Combat 
Fundamentals Air Operations Center. 
History of the C2 Process 
The C2 process is not a new concept. It was previously titled “The Common 
Operations Framework” in the 2016 version of AFDP 3-0, Operations and Planning. 
Additionally, the sequence of “design, plan, execute, and assess” has been 
established in USAF doctrine since the 1998 version of Air Force Doctrine 
Document 2, Organization and Employment of Aerospace Power, and the 
framework of “planning, preparing, executing, and assessing” is currently described 
as the operations process in US Army doctrine (Army Doctrine Publication [ADP] 5-
0, The Operations Process). 
 Air Force Doctrine Publication 3-0.1, Command and Control 
11 
changing conditions in the OE. 
Planning is the process through which Airmen tailor the tenets of Airpower to the OE and 
provide air and cross-domain solutions to achieve national and military objectives. 
Depending on the desired output, there are several different planning methodologies that 
are applicable to Airmen. These include the joint planning process (JPP), the joint 
planning process for air (JPPA), and the Air Force Planning Process (AFPP). 
Design. Design is the conception and construction of the framework that underpins 
planning. The operational design framework involves a continual effort to understand the 
strategic guidance, understand the OE, define the problem, and develop a description of 
the broad actions needed to achieve the objective. Design provides and shapes the 
foundation of C2 for operations, regardless of the level of war. Its principal purpose is to 
distill clarity from complexity through a broad perspective that deepens understanding 
and visualizes the problem. Additionally, design clearly identifies the problem and informs 
the iterative problem-solving process. The single most important element of design is the 
objective. Therefore, the objective should be determined first to determine why the 
mission is being conducted. Objectives may be defined by a military end-state, higher 
echelon intent, or directed by policy or strategy. Design anchors the C2 process to a 
commander. 
Design at all levels supports commanders and planners in organizing and understanding 
the OE as a complex interactive system. Each level of design is guided by higher echelon 
design and planning activities. It provides context for decision-making and enables 
commanders to accomplish planning, preparing, executing, and assessing. As a 
framework, design provides the necessary “front end” to planning, allows focused 
adaptation in preparation and execution, and serves as the measure for assessment 
activities. Design underpins planning and anchors the other activities to the overarching 
analytical framework for the operation. Ultimately, design results in approaches that align 
activities with the overall strategic plan and provide the initial commander’s intent for the 
operation or mission.8 
 
8 For additional information on planning as a C2 activity, see AFDP 5-0, Planning. 
 
“Design does not replace planning, but planning is 
incomplete without design. The balance between the two varies 
from operation to operation as well as within each operation. 
Design helps the commander provide enough structure to an 
ill-structured problem so that planning can lead to effective action 
toward strategic objectives [emphasis in original].” 
–General James N. Mattis, USMC (Ret) 
26th Secretary of Defense 
 Air Force Doctrine Publication 3-0.1, Command and Control 
12 
PREPARING 
Preparing represents the overlapping activities between planning and execution used to 
share information, gain consensus, explain tasks, and optimize operations. Effective 
preparation includes rehearsals or exercises to ensure transition activities are 
understood, inspections and checks to verify readiness, and timely back-briefs to 
address lessons learned prior to execution. 
Preparing encompasses the coordinating, refining, and transitioning actions 
necessary to ensure positive communication and successful execution among superior, 
subordinate, and parallel forces. Preparing ensures a seamless transition from planning 
to execution by establishing a common operational picture. This enables a smooth 
handoff from planners to executors, ensuring that all stakeholders are aligned and aware 
of their roles and responsibilities. Key indicators of a successful transition include: 
 Availability of required resources and support. 
 Clear understanding of tasks, responsibilities, and timelines. 
 Effective communication and coordination among different units and agencies. 
 Timely and accurate exchange of information between planners and executors. 
Coordinating. Coordination is defined as the necessary actions to ensure adequate 
information exchange that integrates, synchronizes, and deconflicts operations between 
separate organizations. It involves sharing information to gain consensus, explaining 
tasks, and optimizing operations. Coordination in advance of execution is critical to 
ensuring that required support is available. Commanders should share information (both 
vertically and horizontally) to produce trusting relationships, and secure agreements 
necessary for efficient multinational and joint operations. Coordination’s benefits include 
minimizing the risk of fratricide through deconfliction and increasing overall understanding 
of the OE. Coordination does not replace formal approval processes. It is normally used 
between functions of a supporting staff. 
Direct liaison authorized (DIRLAUTH) is used to coordinate with an organization outside 
of the immediate staff or organization, or between component staffs. Although each 
component of a joint force develops its own plan as part of the JFC’s overall effort, these 
plans are most successful if they are coordinated among the Service components. Plans 
should be coordinated with as much time as possible before execution, to ensure all 
required support is coordinated for the operation. 
Preparing as a Unique Step 
Previous categorization of major C2 activities considered preparing sub-activities at 
the end of planning or the beginning of execution. Numerous lessons learned have 
identified that the lack of a distinct preparing activity led to planning and execution 
oversights for the time and resource requirements necessary to execute operations. 
 Air Force Doctrine Publication 3-0.1, Command and Control 
13 
Examples of coordinating actions include sharing Intelligence, Surveillance, and 
Reconnaissance (ISR) assets with joint force components; coordinating with tanker and 
airlift units for refueling and transportation support; and synchronizing airspace 
management with adjacent units. 
Refining. Refining is the modification of the planned concept of operations due to 
changes realized prior to execution. This ensures that the plan remains relevant and 
effective in response to changing circumstances. 
Examples of refining actions include adjusting the air tasking order (ATO) based on 
changing space or terrestrial weather conditions, refining target lists based on new 
intelligence, and updating the airspace control plan (ACP) to accommodate additional 
aircraft. 
Transitioning. Transitioning is a process that includes the final activities before 
execution. Commanders hold rehearsals and exercises to ensure the staff is ready to 
proceed to execution. Checklists are generated and a battle rhythm is established to 
support the commander’s decision cycle. Inspections verify the readiness of subordinate 
units to ensure they understand their mission. Finally, lessons learned are communicated 
as the long-range planners formally hand off their plan to the operation executors. 
Transition generally ends with an order that puts the plan into action. 
EXECUTING 
Execution is putting a plan into action while using situational understanding to assess 
progress and adjust operations as the situation changes. C2 in execution focuses on 
activities and decisions to seize and retain the initiative, build, and maintain 
momentum, and exploit success. Through C2 in execution, the commander can 
monitor and adapt operations, as necessary. Therefore, C2 in execution is directly linked 
to the commander’s decision cycle because commanders, staffs, and subordinate 
commanders focus their efforts on translating decisions into actions. They direct action to 
apply combat power at decisive points and times to achieve objectives and accomplish 
missions. Furthermore, executing includes integrating and synchronizing operations 
based on the changes enacted by subordinate units. 
Generation. The first execution activity is usually generation. Generating includes 
posturing forces aligned with the plan and capable of executing the commander’s intent. 
The actions required to generate airpower happen across a spectrum of organizations 
and processes ranging from mission generation up through global force management 
(e.g., global force deployments, time-phased force and deployment data [TPFDD] 
management, establishing alert status, transloading). Examples of generating actions 
include posturing squadrons for combat operations, generating sorties, and tasking air 
defense systems. 
Execution marks a fundamental shift in the role of the commander. Whereas the 
commander is heavily involved in planning and preparing, their role changes during 
execution to empower subordinates to make decisions on their behalf. This fundamental 
shift in C2 during execution is key to achieving decentralized execution under the mission 
command philosophy. 
 Air Force Doctrine Publication 3-0.1, Command and Control 
14 
Execution begins upon the direction of the commander. There are many methods 
that a commander can use to issue an execution order. In general, the air component 
commander and subordinate echelons may use a MTO technique to clearly communicate 
commander’s intent and empower Airmen to make effective on-scene decisions during 
complex, rapidly unfolding operations. 
Decentralized execution is the fundamental characteristic of operations guided by 
a mission command philosophy. The imperative for decentralized execution stems 
from the premise that decisions regarding tactical employment are optimized when made 
by those closest to the fight. Tactically proficient Airmen, armed with clear commander's 
intent and a shared understanding of an operation's purpose and wider operational and 
strategic context, maximize airpower's lethality. History shows that the rapidity of action 
generated by decentralized execution is the surest method of operating inside the 
enemy’s decision cycle. Decentralized execution promotes effectiveness and resilience 
at the tactical level. 
Battle Management. C2 in execution is battle management—the management of 
activities within the OE based on the commands, direction, and guidance given by 
appropriate authority. These activities include the process of directing weapons, sensors, 
and support, within the commander's defined acceptable level of risk, to achieve the 
commander’s intent. Battle management allows the direct and often real-time monitoring 
of operations based on commander’s intent and the scope of a commander’s orders. The 
results of effective battle management include timely decisions, communicated 
assessments, and solved problems. Battle management enables decentralized 
operations through C2 nodes. 
C2 Nodes. C2 nodes are elements of a C2 system that represent people, places, or 
physical objects that execute decentralized operations. Common examples of C2 nodes 
include the elements in the theater air control system (TACS) such as mission 
commanders (MCs), Airborne Warning and Control System (AWACS), forward air 
controllers (FACs), and battle control centers (BCCs). Nodes may span several levels of 
Battle Management Example: Global Air Mobility Adjustment 
Battle management uses a variety of C2 systems. For air mobility operations, the 
Global Air Mobility Support System (GAMSS) is the C2 system that enables air 
mobility operations. During execution, GAMSS C2 nodes perform battle 
management to meet dynamic changes in the OE. 
For example, on 16 April 2010, Iceland’s Eyjafjallajökull volcano erupted, spewing 
an ash cloud that closed much of Europe’s airspace. In response, nearly 400 
airlift, tanker, and aeromedical evacuation missions battle managed by the 618 
AOC were rerouted to ensure the continued delivery of personnel and equipment 
to support surge operations in Afghanistan and Iraq. In the end, effective C2 in 
execution rerouted over 600 missions, moved over 17,000 tons of supplies, and 
transported over 47,000 people to overcome unplanned hazards. 
 Air Force Doctrine Publication 3-0.1, Command and Control 
15 
operations and have varying levels of capability. C2 nodes should understand their 
authorities, roles in decision-making and execution, and relationship to other nodes. 
Tactical C2. Some C2 nodes are known as tactical C2 (TAC C2). TAC C2 are the 
elements conducting battle management at a tactical level, even if those tactical actions 
have theater-wide effects. Generally, TAC C2 manages specific missions. Missions are 
essential tasks, together with the purpose, that clearly indicate the action to be taken and 
the reason for the action. Missions are generally related to the air component in the form 
of dispatching aircraft to accomplish tasks. Mission execution begins with the decision for 
mission launch and includes all functions necessary to ensure effective accomplishment. 
ASSESSING 
Assessment starts when defining tactical tasks and objectives. Assessment is a continual 
activity where the staff observes the OE and incremental progress toward the 
end-state(s). Assessment drives changes to plans and strategy. Operational 
assessments help the commander and staff determine progress toward mission 
accomplishment. Assessment results enhance the commander’s decision-making 
capability, directing more effective operations, and addressing a constantly evolving OE. 
A secondary purpose is to maintain alignment with higher headquarters (HHQ) priorities, 
schemes of maneuver, and operational objectives. 
Integrating assessment into planning, preparing, and execution can help commanders 
and staffs at any echelon to: 
 Develop mission success criteria to address specified and essential tasks. 
 Compare observed OE conditions to desired objectives and/or end-state conditions. 
 Determine validity of key planning facts and assumptions. 
 During execution, determine whether the desired effects have been created and 
whether the objectives are being achieved. 
 During execution, assess the effectiveness of allocated resources against objectives, 
tasks, effects, and mission performance. 
 Determine whether an increase, decrease or change to resources is required. 
 Identify the risks and barriers to mission accomplishment. 
 Identify opportunities to accelerate mission accomplishment. 
Fundamental Principles. The assessment activity consists of the following fundamental 
principles: 
 Identify information and intelligence requirements. During planning, acquiring a 
baseline understanding assists in setting objectives and determining thresholds for 
success and failure. 
 Air Force Doctrine Publication 3-0.1, Command and Control 
16 
 Develop or modify the assessment plan. Linking information and intelligence 
requirements to appropriate measures and indicators and containing a collection plan 
to gather appropriate data. 
 Collect information and intelligence. During execution, forces use the collection 
plan and defined reporting procedures to gather information about the environment 
and ongoing operations. 
 Conduct periodic or event-based assessments. Commanders and their staffs 
usually conduct an assessment based on events or at specified intervals during an 
operation. 
 Conduct change reporting. Commanders are especially interested in learning how 
friendly or enemy behavior has changed from expectations or norms established 
earlier in prior operations. While many initial reports may prove false or are regarded 
as outliers, once a pattern of change is reliably perceived or discerned by 
assessment, it should be highlighted for commanders’ attention. 
 Provide feedback. Assessment reports inform the commander and other 
stakeholders about current conditions and communicate progress toward desired 
objectives and end-states. 
Assessment Considerations. Assessment is a continuous process that measures the 
overall effectiveness of employing capabilities during military operations. It is also the 
determination of the progress toward accomplishing a task, creating a condition, or 
achieving an objective. Assessment supports a commander’s decision-making process 
by providing insight into the effectiveness of their strategy and accompanying plans. Many 
types of assessment exist and may be used to support operations. Still, assessment in 
this document refers to activities that support the commander’s decision-making process. 
In an effects-based approach, assessment should provide the commander with the 
answers to these basic questions: 
 Are we doing things right (measures of performance)? 
 Are we doing the right things (measures of effectiveness)? 
 Are we measuring the right things? 
The first question addresses the performance of planned air operations by assessing the 
completion of tasks. The second question addresses the level at which the commander’s 
desired effects are being observed in the OE and prompts an examination of the links 
between performance and effects. Finally, the third question addresses the assessment 
process and the importance of understanding how one chooses to measure the links 
between performance, cause, and effect. When appropriately determined, the answers 
to these questions should provide the commander with valid information to base decisions 
about adapting strategy. 
While often depicted as a separate stage of the air tasking cycle for conceptual clarity, 
assessment is interwoven throughout operational design, planning, and execution. The 
 Air Force Doctrine Publication 3-0.1, Command and Control 
17 
assessment process should begin as the broad strategy is laid out (including the 
development of assessment criteria). It continues through detailed planning (with the 
development of metrics and data sources). Finally, it extends to the evaluation of 
measures during and after execution. This process is iterative as assessment results 
influence future strategy and planning. 
Assessment consolidates data from many sources and should summarize that data 
concisely and in context. It should follow a rigorous, defensible analytical process that 
allows commanders and planners to view details of methods used and results produced. 
It communicates relevant uncertainty in the data and the associated risks. In short, 
assessment should allow judgments on a commander’s strategy supported by analysis. 
APPLYING THE COMMAND AND CONTROL PROCESS 
Assigning an operation to a subordinate commander and establishing an appropriate 
force structure are requisites for conducting the C2 process within the CC-DC-DE 
framework. The following section provides considerations for applying the C2 process to 
realize distributed control. 
ASSIGNING OPERATIONS AND AUTHORITIES 
To distribute control, the air component commander clearly defines and assigns 
an operation, with authority to conduct the corresponding C2 process, to a 
subordinate commander. In this context, certain limitations may be imposed by the air 
component commander to delineate the extent of authority delegated to a subordinate 
commander. Since the C2 process is conducted for a specific operation, there may be 
instances where a subordinate unit has Distributed Control for some operations while the 
air component commander retains control of others. The vignette on page 21 provides an 
example of distributing control to a subordinate echelon with a specific operation with an 
associated operational area. In this case, the 7440th Composite Wing (CW) commander 
was directed to open a second front in the Gulf War and accomplish several clearly 
defined tasks. The mechanism for transmitting commander’s intent and authorities to the 
7440 CW was an order. 
An order is a communication, written, oral, or by signal, which conveys instructions from 
a superior to a subordinate. Orders that delegate authority to conduct the C2 process 
should focus on the purpose of the operation rather than details of how to perform 
assigned tasks. Furthermore, they should specify delegated authorities that are enduring, 
temporary, or conditions-based.9 
FORCE STRUCTURE 
There is no mandatory structure for realizing CC-DC-DE in operations. However, 
there are established USAF organizations that facilitate C2 through the CC-DC-DE 
framework. The most relevant USAF structure is the air expeditionary task force (AETF). 
When established, AETFs may fill the role of a Service component command or as a 
subordinate Service command, generally below the CCMD-level. AETFs are scalable, 
 
9 For additional information on orders, see AFDP 5-0, Planning. 
 Air Force Doctrine Publication 3-0.1, Command and Control 
18 
tailorable organizations with three elements: a single, clearly designated commander, 
appropriate C2 mechanisms, and tailored and fully supported forces. AETFs provide 
JFCs with a task-organized and integrated package with the appropriate balance of force 
sustainment, C2, and force protection.10 
An air component commander may delegate an AETF commander specific operational 
authorities (derived from their specified command relationship) that are sufficient to 
conduct the C2 process for their assigned or attached forces. This model supports 
operations within the framework of CC-DC-DE because the theater air component 
commander maintains centralized command through their specified command 
relationship (OPCON established by the CCDR), and the AETF operates with Distributed 
Control as a sub-theater echelon. Subsequently, the tactical echelon commanders are 
delegated execution authority to enable decentralized operations. 
Distributed Control may be replicated across several sub-theater or “middle” echelons. 
During normal operations, AETF commanders, while conducting the C2 process for their 
assigned operations, continuously communicate, coordinate, and synchronize their 
operations with the theater air component commander and horizontally with other AETFs. 
The theater air component commander is able to reprioritize and adjust the C2 activities 
of the AETFs as necessary to meet the overall CCMD mission. 
In a contested, degraded, or operationally limited environment, the AETF has the 
necessary authority to C2 its forces when disconnected from the theater air component 
commander. By delegating sufficient operational authorities and exercising them prior to 
the degraded environment, the air component can continue effective air operations. See 
the following “Distributed Control Examples” for a depiction of how an AETF may conduct 
the C2 process at an echelon below the theater air component level. 
 
10 For additional information on AETFs, see AFDP 3-0, Operations. 
Sub-Theater Force Presentation Terminology 
The USAF is actively iterating through terminology to describe levels of sub-theater 
command. In the following figures, the level below the theater is referred to as the 
sub-theater or “middle” echelon. Another commonly used term is the “3rd echelon.” 
Regardless of naming convention, the intent is to describe force structure below 
the CCMD level. 
 Air Force Doctrine Publication 3-0.1, Command and Control 
19 
 
Distributed Control Example 1 of 3 
Distributed Control Example 2 of 3 
 Air Force Doctrine Publication 3-0.1, Command and Control 
20 
 
 
Distributed Control Example 3 of 3 
 Air Force Doctrine Publication 3-0.1, Command and Control 
21 
 
JOINT TASK FORCE PROVEN FORCE:  
A Historical Example of Distributed Control 
An air component commander may choose to exercise Distributed Control
through an air task force (ATF) or combat wing. As units of action advance their
C2 capabilities with empowered commanders, operations centers, and robust 
staffs, they may gain the capacity to conduct the C2 process for their assigned 
forces. The following example from Joint Task Force (JTF) Proven Force highlights 
how a combat wing or ATF may operate with Distributed Control. 
During the Gulf War of 1990-1991, the 7440th Composite Wing 
(CW) (Provisional), the combat arm of JTF Proven Force, was 
staffed to support combat operations and composed of airframes 
capable of strike, suppression of enemy air defenses, electronic 
warfare, surveillance and reconnaissance, counterair, refueling, 
and rescue. Resourced with the necessary organic capabilities, the 
wing was able to launch its own strike packages without assistance 
from US Air Forces Central (CENTAF). 
CENTAF provided the wing an order to open a second Iraqi front whenever 
possible. The order included three broad tasks: 1) deny sanctuary to the Iraqi Air 
Force by attacking Iraq’s northern air bases, 2) tie down Iraqi ground forces near 
the Turkish border, and 3) attack nuclear, biological, and chemical facilities in
northern Iraq. Because some of the wing’s aircraft lacked the range to attack south 
of Baghdad, the wing was assigned a large area of responsibility in northern Iraq. 
However, CENTAF retained command authority over the wing’s operational plans 
as well as the authority to task the wing by exception. 
The wing commander, Brig Gen Downer, operated in accordance with 
commander’s intent, but the method of accomplishing the three broad tasks was 
left to him. The wing issued its squadrons orders and allowed mission commanders 
to build strike packages. The 7440th produced its own air tasking order (ATO) and 
flew 50-60 combat sorties per day in two or three waves at General Downer’s 
discretion. CENTAF occasionally tasked the wing by exception, otherwise, General 
Horner empowered General Downer to effectively “fight” with his wing. 
Ultimately, the 7440 CW had the authority, capability, and capacity to conduct the 
entire C2 process. Gen Downer and the 7440 CW planned, prepared, executed, 
and assessed operations with distributed authority from the CENTAF commander. 
JTF Proven Force represents a practical example of a decentralized operation 
conducted through the mission command philosophy and framework. 
–Derived from the Gulf War Air Power Survey and a thesis presented to the 
USAF’s School of Advanced Airpower Studies by Major Michael E. Fischer
 Air Force Doctrine Publication 3-0.1, Command and Control 
22 
CHAPTER 3: COMMAND AND CONTROL SYSTEMS 
A C2 system is the personnel, facilities, equipment, communications, and 
procedures essential for a commander to plan, direct, and C2 operations of forces 
pursuant to the missions assigned. This chapter discusses C2 systems in terms of two 
major elements: the organization of C2 personnel, facilities, and equipment (e.g., AFFOR 
staff, AOC staff, wing A-Staff, and TACS) and the technology that enables effective 
communication and decision-making. Due to mission requirements and numerous 
variables, the components and organization of a C2 system vary. However, airpower 
employment requires four scalable elements: 
 An air control system with C2 nodes (e.g., facilities, equipment, communications). 
 Service echelon structure to provide combat power to the nodes (e.g., procedures). 
 Sufficient staff for the air component commander (e.g., personnel). 
 Robust technological systems to facilitate communications, information sharing, 
processing, analysis, and management. 
In general, people, processes, and effective use of available technology enable 
successful C2 for military operations. Due to these qualities, C2 systems are often the 
most visible element of the C2 function and may be confused as being C2 instead of an 
element that supports C2.11 Ultimately, the USAF requires an agile and resilient 
architecture to effectively C2 assigned operations. 
THEATER AFFOR STAFF AND AOC STAFF 
In their role as the COMAFFOR, the air component commander meets Service support 
responsibilities to the JFC by utilizing their OPCON and administrative authorities to C2 
subordinate Service component echelons. The structure of the subordinate Service 
echelons is highly dependent on the purpose of the force, duration of the mission, and 
presentation level (theater or sub-theater). Historically, the common practice was 
assigning forces at the theater-level to the theater air component commander. Therefore, 
the role of the subordinate echelons was to provide administrative functions and organize, 
train, and equip (OT&E) forces. However, under a Distributed Control construct, the role 
of subordinate command echelons will likely increase to include C2 authorities over USAF 
capabilities.12 
AFFOR AND AOC STAFF 
At the theater or sub-theater level, the appointed air component commander requires an 
appropriately sized and configured C2 system to effectively C2 USAF forces and joint air 
forces made available for tasking. 
 
11 For additional information on specific C2 procedures, see AFTTP 3-3.AOC, Combat Fundamentals-
AOC. 
12 For additional information on Service component organization, see AFDP 3-0, Operations. 
 Air Force Doctrine Publication 3-0.1, Command and Control 
23 
At the theater-level, this C2 system typically includes an AOC for operational employment 
responsibilities (as the theater JFACC), as well as an air component Service staff (AFFOR 
staff) for both administrative and long-range strategic responsibilities (as the theater 
COMAFFOR). The dual-hatted nature of the theater air component commander may force 
the AOC and AFFOR staff to fully integrate to cover the totality of the theater air 
component commander’s responsibilities (i.e., as a component major command [C-
MAJCOM] or component numbered air force [C-NAF] commander). As the COMAFFOR, 
the theater air component commander and their AFFOR staff provide airpower to the 
TACS by conducting C2 over the subordinate air echelons. In their role as the theater 
JFACC, the air component commander and their AFFOR staff integrate with the AOC 
staff to C2 the employment of airpower. 
Division of workload and responsibilities between the AOC and theater AFFOR staff 
depend upon the requirements of the theater air component commander, mission 
requirements, and resources available. In general, the AOC plans for and employs the 
forces provided, while the AFFOR staff is focused on long-range theater strategy and the 
Service component’s responsibility to OT&E the USAF forces that will be employed under 
CCDR orders and direction. 
THEATER AFFOR STAFF ORGANIZATION 
The differing mission requirements of any given operation may dictate different task 
emphasis and staff arrangements. Very large or complex operations, for example, may 
require all staff directorates. In some cases, senior component liaison elements may not 
be needed, while some of the required support may be obtained through reachback. For 
very small or limited operations, a full AFFOR staff may not be required. As a rule of 
thumb, the size and span of the AFFOR staff should normally be held to the smallest 
number of divisions necessary to manage the demands of the operation, in some cases, 
the air component commander may combine some leadership positions (e.g., A3/5). 
Other operations may employ an AFFOR staff split into forward and rear elements, using 
reachback to maintain unity of effort. In each case, based on regional requirements, the 
air component commander determines the size, shape, and location of the AFFOR staff, 
AOC, and liaisons to best support the operation. 
Command Section. The command section is normally composed of the air component 
commander, deputy commander, COS, command chief master sergeant, executive 
assistant, and appropriate administrative support personnel. Within the command 
section, the COS coordinates and directs the daily activities of the AFFOR staff, approves 
actions, orders, and plans, as authorized by the air component commander, and ensures 
air component commander decisions and concepts are implemented by directing and 
assigning staff responsibilities. 
Personal Staff. The air component commander has several staff activities and functions 
that normally operate outside the AFFOR staff directorates. These activities and functions 
fulfill specific responsibilities usually related to providing close, personal advice or 
services to the commander, or assisting the commander and the component staff with 
technical, administrative, strategic, operational, or tactical matters. These activities may 
include the commander’s legal advisor, political advisor, public affairs advisor, inspector 
general, protocol advisor, historian, chaplain, and advisors or directors for 
 Air Force Doctrine Publication 3-0.1, Command and Control 
24 
counterintelligence and special investigations, financial management, force protection, air 
mobility 
operations, 
cyberspace 
operations, 
medical, 
knowledge 
operations 
management, and safety. Some of these functions may also provide the air component 
commander with capabilities beyond strictly functional ones. For example, public affairs 
and cyberspace operations are Information Warfare (IW) forces, providing the 
commander with the ability to leverage capabilities to achieve information advantage, 
preserve decision advantage, and create effects through Operations in the Information 
Environment (OIE). Based on the needs of the operation and the requirements of the 
AFFOR staff, some of these activities may be located within the AFFOR staff directorates. 
Senior Component Liaisons. The senior liaison officer (LNO) from each component 
represents their respective commander to the air component commander. Subordinate 
LNOs from each component may perform duties throughout the staff as required, 
providing weapon system expertise. LNOs should be knowledgeable of the capabilities 
and limitations of their units and Service. 
Manpower, Personnel, and Services (A1). The director of manpower, personnel, and 
services is the principal staff assistant to the air component commander for total force 
accountability, personnel policy and procedures, the establishment and documentation of 
manpower requirements, organizational structures, mortuary affairs, food and force 
beddown operations, the coordination of exchange services, and the provision of 
quality-of-life programs to enable and sustain forces assigned and attached. 
Intelligence, Surveillance, and Reconnaissance (A2). The director of ISR is the 
principal staff assistant for policy and guidance for all Air Force ISR operational 
architectures, personnel, systems, training, and intelligence preparation of the operational 
environment (IPOE). The A2 provides intelligence support to forces within the assigned 
area of operations. The A2 does not normally direct ISR collection assets when an ISR 
division is resident in the AOC, this is normally directed by the AOC’s ISR division chief. 
Operations (A3). The director of operations serves as the principal staff assistant in the 
direction and C2 of all assigned and attached Air Force forces. When OPCON of Air Force 
units is formally transferred to the air component commander, the A3 ensures they can 
perform tasked missions. This includes monitoring unit deployments and beddown 
locations, combat readiness, mission rehearsals, force protection, and training activities. 
The A3 also provides terrestrial and space weather support to forces within the assigned 
AO. Finally, the A3 is the focal point for executing component operations outside the 
purview of the AOC.  
Logistics (A4). The director of logistics is the principal staff assistant for logistics and 
sustainment support. The A4 staff is a broad, multi-disciplined organization, generally 
comprised of logistics plans, munitions, fuels, vehicle management, materiel 
management, maintenance, host nation support, contracting, distribution, and combat 
logistics support. On some AFFOR staffs, the director of logistics also serves as the 
advisor for civil engineer installation management, security forces, fire emergency 
services, explosive ordinance disposal, emergency management, agile combat support, 
planning for commercial support, integrated defense, weapons system security, 
antiterrorism, force protection, and the senior maintenance officer. 
 Air Force Doctrine Publication 3-0.1, Command and Control 
25 
Plans and Requirements (A5). The director of plans and requirements serves as the 
principal staff assistant for all consolidated planning functions. In coordination with the 
A4, the A5 conducts comprehensive force-level movement and execution planning 
throughout the campaign. This involves preparation and subsequent refinement of the 
force flow, beddown, and redeployment in the TPFDD. The A5 is the focal point for 
planning not under the purview of the AOC, including the campaign support plan and 
security cooperation country plans. This planning is normally preceded by the 
development of a strategy. The A5 is also the focal point for the operational assessment 
of such plans. In addition, the A5 leads in the development of the organizational structure 
and COMREL for the Air Force component within the framework of the joint operation. 
The A5 normally publishes the Air Force component operations order to support the JFC’s 
campaign. 
Communications (A6). The director of communications is the principal staff assistant for 
communications electronics and certain information capabilities. This includes 
establishing the theater communications and automated systems architecture to support 
operational and command requirements. 
Installations and Mission Support (A7). Current AFFOR staffs no longer include the A7 
but have incorporated the duties under the A4 and Air Force installation and mission 
support. However, CCMD joint staffs still retain this directorate as the J7. Should the air 
component commander create such a directorate, duties include being a primary advisor 
for installations, mission support, force protection, explosive ordnance disposal, civil 
engineering, firefighting, emergency management, chemical, biological, radiological, and 
nuclear passive defense and response, contracting, and all cross-functional expeditionary 
combat support. 
Strategic Plans and Programs (A8). The director of strategic plans and programs 
provides comprehensive advice on all aspects of strategic planning and programming. 
The A8 also conducts program assessment and provides coordinated resource inputs to 
the supporting Air Force major command’s program objective memorandum processes. 
Studies, Analyses, Assessments, and Lessons Learned (A9). The director of studies, 
analyses, assessments, and lessons learned, collects, documents, analyzes, and reports 
data necessary to understand and improve the effectiveness and efficiency of Air Force 
operations and contingency planning. 
Strategic Deterrence and Nuclear Integration (A10). The director of strategic 
deterrence and nuclear integration is the primary advisor for strategic deterrence, 
conventional/nuclear integration, and Air Force nuclear enterprise matters. This includes 
nuclear force structure, readiness, sustainability, and vulnerability data, as well as nuclear 
command, control and communications, and nuclear weapons employment. 
AOC ORGANIZATION13 
The baseline AOC organization includes an AOC commander, five divisions (strategy, 
combat plans, combat operations, ISR, and air mobility), and multiple support and 
specialty teams. Each integrates numerous disciplines in a cross-functional team 
 
13 The AOC is considered part of the TACS. The organization is presented here due to the close integration 
with the AFFOR staff. 
 Air Force Doctrine Publication 3-0.1, Command and Control 
26 
approach to planning and execution. Liaisons from other Service and functional 
components may be present to represent the full range of joint air, space, and cyberspace 
capabilities made available to the air component commander. The following provides a 
summary of the major elements of an AOC.14 
AOC Commander. The AOC commander is charged with effectively managing air 
component operations and establishing the AOC battle rhythm. The AOC commander 
develops and directs processes to design, plan, coordinate, allocate, task, execute, and 
assess air component operations in the area of operations or joint operations area based 
on JFC and air component commander guidance. The AOC commander commands the 
AOC and should be prepared to direct a joint AOC when designated. 
Air Mobility Division/A3M (AMD). The AMD plans, coordinates, tasks, and executes the 
intra-theater air mobility mission. The AMD is normally comprised of four core teams: the 
airlift control team, the air refueling control team, the air mobility control team, and the 
aeromedical evacuation control team. A fifth team, the air mobility support team may also 
be established if required. Major products include airlift apportionment plans and air 
refueling (AR) inputs to the AOC’s AOD, master air attack plan (MAAP), ATO, airspace 
control order (ACO), and special instructions (SPINS). The AMD coordinates with the 
theater deployment distribution operations center and the 618 AOC. The AMD also 
coordinates closely with the director of mobility forces (DIRMOBFOR), who serves as an 
air mobility functional advisor to the air component commander.15 
Intelligence, Surveillance, & Reconnaissance Division/A32 (ISRD). The ISR division, 
in conjunction with the other AOC divisions, plans and executes airborne ISR operations 
and provides combat ISR support to air component planning, execution, and assessment 
activities. The ISRD has four core teams: the analysis, correlation, and fusion team; the 
targeting and tactical assessment team; the ISR operations team; and the processing, 
exploitation, and dissemination management team. Major products include: the 
reconnaissance, surveillance, and target acquisition annex to the ATO (or the ISR 
collection plan); updated IPOE; air component target nomination list; and intelligence 
summaries. 
Combat Operations Division/A33 (COD). The COD monitors and executes current 
operations. The COD is also the focal point for monitoring the execution of joint and 
combined operations, such as time-sensitive targeting, theater missile defense, joint 
suppression of enemy air defense supported by theater forces, and the joint air attack 
team. The COD is normally task-organized into four functionally oriented core teams: 
offensive operations, defensive operations, senior intelligence duty officer team, and 
interface control team, as well as weather representatives. The division’s main products 
are daily ATO, ACO, and cyberspace tasking order (CTO) changes, and changes to other 
 
14 For additional information on the processes, roles, and responsibilities of the AOC staff, see AFTTP 
3-3.AOC, Combat Fundamentals-AOC. 
15 Theater AOCs do not always have a DIRMOBFOR. Once the CCMD does a request for forces, and 
USTRANSCOM tasks Air Mobility Command to provide one, they are appointed to the JFACC's staff as an 
air mobility functional advisor to coordinate with the AMD for inclusion of the inter-theater airflow, provided 
by 618 AOC or other CCMDs, into the ATO. 
 Air Force Doctrine Publication 3-0.1, Command and Control 
27 
plans and orders, as required. 
Combat Plans Division/A34 (CPD). The CPD applies operational art to develop detailed 
execution plans for air component operations. The CPD is normally task-organized into 
four functionally oriented core teams: the targeting effects team, the MAAP team, the ATO 
production team, which also produces cyberspace tasking orders (CTO), as applicable, 
and the C2 planning team. The division’s key products are an area air defense plan 
(AADP), ACP, ATO, CTO, ACO, SPINS, and joint integrated prioritized target list. 
Strategy Division/A35 (SRD). The SRD concentrates on long-range design and planning 
of air component operations to achieve JFC objectives by developing, refining, 
disseminating, and assessing progress toward achieving the air component commander 
component strategy. The SRD is normally task-organized into three functionally oriented 
core teams: the strategy plans team, the strategy guidance team, and the operational 
assessment team. IW planners may be attached to the SRD to coordinate with other AOC 
divisions. Alternatively, IW planners may report directly to the AOC commander as part 
of a specialty team. In some cases, IW planners may be matrixed to support the SRD or 
other teams but report to a functional authority. For example, public affairs (a principal IW 
capability) are typically aligned under the commander’s special staff but may provide 
individuals as needed to support OIE and other operational planning efforts. 
THEATER STAFF STRUCTURES 
Mission requirements, manning, and rank structure differences between the various 
C-MAJCOMs and C-NAFs do not readily support a “one size fits all” structure for the air 
component commander’s C2 organization. In general, the AOC and AFFOR staffs are 
either integrated into a single staff or kept as separate staffs. 
AOC AND AFFOR INTEGRATED INTO A SINGLE STAFF 
Under this construct the AOC commander works for the A3, where the core element of 
the air component staff is the AFFOR staff. The AOC retains its organization and is part 
of the A3 staff. To improve staff-to-staff coordination with the JFC’s staff and the other 
components, the AOC divisions are also identified with an appropriate A3 staff number 
(e.g., COD is also designated as A33). This construct is illustrated in the figure, “AOC as 
Part of AFFOR/Air Component A3.” This construct may improve integration between air 
component staff and the AOC and provide easier cross-component staff-to-staff 
integration. While providing synergies, this structure also requires the A3 and 
joint/combined AOC staffs to have clearly defined roles and responsibilities. 
AOC AND THEATER AFFOR STAFF AS SEPARATE ORGANIZATIONS 
In this construct, the AOC and Air Force Service component staff are separate 
organizations, each reporting directly to the air component commander. This construct is 
illustrated in the figure, “AOC and AFFOR Staff as Different Organizations.” This construct 
provides manpower focused at appropriate levels for the AFFOR staff and the AOC and 
provides a redundant capability for additional taskings (e.g., sub-theater Service 
component command, Joint Task Force (JTF) headquarters). The structure enables 
parallel operations between the separate air component commanders and AOC staffs, 
 Air Force Doctrine Publication 3-0.1, Command and Control 
28 
separating responsibilities and simultaneously accomplishing OT&E and combat 
operations, respectively. While providing more flexibility in the different Service and joint 
roles of the air component commander, this structure requires more personnel, requires 
that cross-component staff-to-staff channels have robust interaction, and requires that 
internal staff integration be clearly defined. 
 Air Force Doctrine Publication 3-0.1, Command and Control 
29 
WING A-STAFF STRUCTURE 
Distributed Control constructs may use a wing A-Staff structure to facilitate integration 
with wing, component, and joint OCs. This structure represents best practices from the 
AFFOR and AOC staff to provide commanders with a model for wing A-Staffs. 
Generally, wing A-Staffs mirror the AFFOR staff and include the following positions. A1 
through A6 should be separate directorates and are generally not combined. A7 through 
A10 are optional directorates that may be combined with another directorate at the 
discretion of the wing commander. 
Chief of Staff. The COS coordinates, prioritizes, and promulgates the wing commander’s 
direction for the daily activities of the wing staff. The COS provides staff support to the 
wing commander to execute wing operations. The COS also provides the A-Staff with 
intent, guidance, and direction to execute given tasks, and is responsible for the 
operations, health, and welfare of the A-staff. They are the primary integrators of staff 
activities. The COS may have administrative command responsibilities and duties for the 
A-Staff via G-series orders at the wing commander’s discretion. 
Deputy Chief of Staff (DCOS). The DCOS reports to and supports the COS on daily 
duties and responsibilities for staff operations in garrison and while deployed. The DCOS 
performs duties as the COS in the absence of the incumbent. 
Manpower, Personnel, and Services (A1). The director of manpower, personnel, and 
services is the wing’s A1 and serves as the lead planner for manpower, personnel, and 
services matters, with a primary focus on planning and reporting expeditionary readiness. 
Intelligence, Surveillance, and Reconnaissance (A2). The director of ISR is the wing’s 
A2/senior intelligence officer (SIO) and serves as the principal advisor to the wing 
commander and staff on all ISR planning, direction, collection, processing, exploitation, 
analysis, and production. The A2/SIO also oversees the dissemination and integration 
capabilities and limitations at the wing level. The A2/SIO is responsible for wing-wide 
intelligence including subordinate groups, force elements, and squadrons to ensure the 
wing is ready for its assigned operations. The A2/SIO has responsibility for overall OT&E 
efforts, priorities, guidance, and intelligence security matters, as well as the development 
of all intelligence airmen through functional organizational placement within the wing. 
Operations (A3). The director of operations is the wing’s A3 and serves as the primary 
staff advisor for wing operational forces. The A3 ensures wing units, both attached and 
permanently assigned, can perform wing missions to achieve effects as tasked by the 
commander and HHQ. This includes wing execution in concert with other wing staff and 
wing operations center (WOC) personnel, monitoring unit deployments/beddown 
locations, and ensuring combat readiness. 
Logistics, Engineering, and Force Protection (A4). The director of logistics, 
engineering, and force protection is the wing A4 and serves as a primary staff advisor to 
synchronize logistics, sustainment, force protection, and combat support planning and 
processes across the wing. 
 Air Force Doctrine Publication 3-0.1, Command and Control 
30 
Plans and Programs (A5). The director of plans and programs is the wing’s A5 and 
serves as the primary staff advisor for the development of wing plans and the wing’s 
support to HHQ engagement activities. The A5 works in close coordination with 
appropriate staff entities to ensure comprehensive planning during all phases of 
operations. The A5 director is the primary advisor to the wing commander for 
requirements identification and prioritization. 
Communications (A6). The director of communications is the wing’s A6 and serves as 
the staff advisor that coordinates and represents cyberspace domain capabilities for 
wing-level objectives and mission requirements with HHQ, mission partners, the A-staff, 
and local organizations. 
Installations and Mission Support (A7). A7 directorates are not usually used. A7 duties 
are usually absorbed by the A4. 
Strategic Plans and Programs (A8). The director of strategic plans and programs, when 
present, is the wing’s A8 and is responsible for developing programs and supporting the 
development and execution of the wing plans and HHQ operation plans and orders. The 
A8 should identify and prioritize capability gaps and advocate for doctrine, organization, 
training, materiel, leadership and education, personnel, facilities, and policy solutions to 
fulfill wing operational requirements. 
Studies, Analyses, Assessments, and Lessons Learned (A9). The director of studies, 
analyses, assessments, and lessons learned, when present, is the wing’s A9 and leads 
the integrated analysis and assessment of all-domain operations across the WOC and 
wing staff. 
Strategic Deterrence and Nuclear Integration (A10). The director of strategic 
deterrence and nuclear integration, when present, is the wing’s A10 and is responsible 
for supporting the execution of wing nuclear C2 responsibilities. Wings with a nuclear 
mission may create an A10 directorate and should coordinate with the HHQ A10 
regarding roles and tasks. 
A-STAFF CONSIDERATIONS 
Integration. The primary integrator of staff activities is the COS and the method for 
integration is a battle rhythm. An effective battle rhythm requires the COS’s active 
management and the staff’s meeting discipline. The COS should establish a deliberate 
battle rhythm control process and structure that achieves and maintains effective decision 
support for the commander and builds a staff’s shared understanding.16 
The A-Staff is generally not a stand-alone unit. However, the wing commander may 
task the COS with administrative command responsibilities and duties for the A-Staff via 
G-series orders. 
A-Staff directors are not usually commanders for their organizations. Similarly, 
commanders should not fill A-Staff roles (i.e., a squadron commander should not also 
serve as the A4). 
 
16 For additional information integrating staff activities, see Appendix D. 
 Air Force Doctrine Publication 3-0.1, Command and Control 
31 
Wing A-Staff members should not serve in dual roles that span both Line and Staff 
functions. For instance, an officer serving as the A-Staff COD chief should not 
simultaneously be a squadron operations officer with responsibilities for executing Line 
operations or supervisory duties related to Line functions. A-Staff members may be 
attached to squadrons, but their A-Staff role should be their primary responsibility. 
Two-digit Directorates. Generally, HHQs will direct two and three-digit directorates and 
divisions. Wing commanders may determine which four-digit divisions or branches (e.g., 
A5XE) to include under each two-digit directorate. Divisions and branches create a 
balance between specialization and integration that positions directorates to operate 
efficiently, adapt to changes, and achieve objectives. The nature and number of divisions 
should depend on the specific needs, goals, and size of the organization and should be 
determined based on the following considerations: 
 Clear Accountability. Dividing roles and responsibilities among different divisions 
aids directors in establishing clear lines of accountability for the performance of 
routine and emergent tasks and functions. 
 Clear Communication Channels. Having structured divisions ensures that there are 
established channels for communication, both within the division and between 
different divisions and directorates. 
 Functional Specialization. Divisions focus on specific functions or areas of 
expertise, such as the delineation between A33 Current Operations and A35 Future 
Operations. 
 Leadership Development. Divisions offer leadership and career development 
opportunities. Experience Airmen gain within their division supports the development 
of necessary skills and experience for future leadership and staff opportunities. 
 Operational Efficiency. Divisions can streamline operations by concentrating 
related tasks and responsibilities within a singular entity. This minimizes bureaucratic 
delays, as specialized teams can operate without consistently deferring to other parts 
of the organization. 
 Resource Allocation. Divisions allow for more precise resource allocation. 
Directorates can allocate resources (e.g., funds, personnel, and equipment) to 
specific divisions based on their unique needs and the importance of their function to 
the organization's overall mission. 
THEATER AIR CONTROL SYSTEM 
At the theater-level, an air component commander conducts C2 over the operational 
employment of both service and provided joint airpower through the TACS. The TACS is 
the USAF’s mechanism for planning and executing air operations. It is scalable and 
tailorable to meet the needs of theater commanders to execute any assigned mission 
across the competition continuum and in all threat environments. 
 Air Force Doctrine Publication 3-0.1, Command and Control 
32 
The TACS is the component of the C2 system through which the air component 
commander executes operational employment (JFACC role) of assigned and attached air 
forces. It provides the air component commander with the means to achieve Distributed 
Control and decentralized execution of air operations. TACS elements may be employed 
in garrison, deployed for contingencies, or deployed to augment theater-specific systems. 
Though they may be configured differently across various theaters, basic functions 
performed by the TACS are the same. The air component commander/airspace control 
authority/AADC executes the ATO, ACP, ACOs, and the AADP via the TACS. As an 
organic USAF system, the TACS remains under the OPCON of the air component 
commander. 
The TACS, in combination with other 
Service airspace control elements and 
systems, constitute the theater air-
ground system (TAGS) which executes 
operations for the JFC through an AOC. 
Each Service component of a joint force 
employs its respective element of the 
TAGS. In multinational commands, the 
name and function of certain TACS 
elements may differ, but multinational 
air 
components 
have 
similar 
capabilities.17 
The TACS provides the air component 
commander with an overarching means 
to C2 counterair operations. It includes 
the 
personnel, 
procedures, 
and 
equipment necessary to plan, direct, 
battle manage, coordinate, and assess 
air operations. The TACS can be 
tailored to support contingencies of any 
size. 
The TACS is composed of dedicated 
C2 elements, dynamic TACS elements, 
and supporting systems. Dedicated 
TACS elements include both airborne 
and ground units whose primary 
mission 
is 
battle 
management. 
Dynamic TACS elements are any other 
weapon system or entity that has a 
primary role other than C2, but that 
may, with appropriate certification and 
 
17 For additional information on the TACS, see AFPD 3-52, Airspace Control, AFTTP 3-2.17, Multi-Service 
Tactics, Techniques, and Procedures (MTTP) for the Theater Air-Ground System, and AFTTP 3-3.TACS, 
Combat Fundamentals-TACS. 
The AOC is the senior element 
within the TACS. The TACS also 
includes 
subordinate 
ground 
and 
airborne elements and is directly 
involved in the C2 and air battle 
management of most air missions. 
Collectively, 
the 
TACS 
has 
the 
capability to plan, direct, integrate, and 
battle manage all air and cyberspace 
forces assigned, attached, or made 
available for tasking; monitor the 
actions of both friendly and enemy 
forces; and plan, direct, coordinate, 
and battle manage air defense and 
airspace control. 
The entire TACS is necessary for 
the air component commander’s 
effective C2 of airpower. 
 Air Force Doctrine Publication 3-0.1, Command and Control 
33 
delegated authority, augment, or substitute for dedicated TACS elements. Support 
systems include those organic or opportunistic surveillance, communications, and 
decision-making capabilities that improve, extend, or expand the capabilities of the TACS. 
TACS is divided into ground and airborne elements that describe the environment from 
which each node operates, not the domain from which they provide C2. In joint operations, 
the TACS may be combined with other service or functional component C2 elements to 
form the TAGS. All elements should coordinate continuously to eliminate duplication of 
effort and ensure adequate commitment of assigned weapons against threats. 
THEATER AIR CONTROL SYSTEM GROUND ELEMENTS 
Air Operations Center. The AOC is the senior element and primary C2 node of the 
TACS. It is where centralized planning, preparation, execution, and assessment of 
assigned air and cyberspace forces occur. 
Both the AFFOR staff and the AOC perform warfighting functions and should work 
together to fulfill air component responsibilities to the JFC. An AOC, along with 
subordinate C2 elements, should be tailored to the requirements of the mission. 
An AOC should be capable of performing the following tasks: 
 Develop the component strategy and requisite planning products. 
 Task, execute, and assess day-to-day component operations. 
The Role of Operations Centers 
Currently, the AOC is the hub of airpower employment. It consolidates the people 
and technology required to run the C2 process at the theater air component level. 
This construct prefers centralizing theater airpower and operating through 
supporting relationships for sub-theater JTFs, rather than attaching individual air 
components. 
Similarly, subordinate echelons within the USAF Service component lack the 
necessary support mechanisms and resources to run separate C2 processes, 
making it challenging to exercise Distributed Control. To overcome this, the 
creation of smaller operations centers (OCs) is crucial. These OCs, like the AOC 
at the theater-level, will need to run the C2 process to conduct C2 for assigned 
operations, whether as a service component to a JTF or a subordinate echelon 
to the theater air component commander. 
The development of smaller scale OCs, such as the WOC, is underway and future 
exercises may explore the creation of an operations center at a middle echelon. 
Both the WOC and AETF OCs should enable Distributed Control within the 
component, and potentially distribute control of air forces under an air component 
commander assigned to a JTF. 
 Air Force Doctrine Publication 3-0.1, Command and Control 
34 
 Plan and execute ISR tasks appropriate to assigned missions. 
 Conduct operational assessment. 
 Execute air mobility operations. 
 Develop and coordinate the ACP and AADP. 
 C2 theater air and missile defense. 
AOCs and their subordinate C2 elements may be geographically or functionally oriented. 
To bring all the USAF’s capabilities together for a given operation or activity, the AOCs 
work together in a mutually supporting command arrangement, with one AOC designated 
as the primary AOC.18 
Joint Air Component Coordination Element (JACCE). The air component commander 
may establish a JACCE to facilitate JFACC coordination with other component 
commanders or the JFC. The JACCE acts as the air component commander’s primary 
representative to the JFC or other component commander and facilitates coordination 
with their staffs. It performs a coordinating function and should communicate the host 
commander’s decisions and interests to the air component commander. Likewise, they 
communicate the air component commander’s intent, capabilities, restraints, and 
perspective to the host commander. The JACCE does not perform C2 functions or 
function as a C2 node. Unless specifically delegated by the air component 
commander, the JACCE has no authority to direct or execute operations. The 
JACCE may provide plans, operations, intelligence, airspace management, logistics, and 
air mobility expertise, as needed. In multinational operations, the JACCE may also 
function as the air component commander’s representative to a host nation. To do so, the 
JFC should authorize DIRLAUTH for air operations coordination between the air 
component commander and host nation. 
Control and Reporting Center (CRC). The CRC is the airspace control and surveillance 
radar facility directly subordinate to the AOC. The CRC may be assigned an airspace 
control sector by the ACA and manages the functions of all USAF surface radars deployed 
within that sector. The CRC’s primary mission is to provide airspace management and 
airspace control, including aircraft detection, tracking, and identification. The CRC also 
issues scramble or airborne orders, performs data link management functions, and 
manages air and missile defense activities within its sector. Additionally, the CRC 
provides C2 liaison, mission control, combat search and rescue (CSAR) support, aircraft 
threat warning, and coordinates air defense artillery (ADA) through a collocated ADA fire 
control officer. The CRC may further delegate control of surveillance areas to subordinate 
radar units or AWACS aircraft within its sector. CRC modernization makes the CRC 
tailorable and scalable for rapid mobility. CRC configurations enable persistent operations 
with full manning or short-duration episodic support with minimal manning. 
 
18 For additional information on internal AOC structure and procedures, see Department of the Air Force 
Manual (DAFMAN) 13-1AOC, Volume 3, Operational Procedures-Air Operations Center (AOC). 
 Air Force Doctrine Publication 3-0.1, Command and Control 
35 
When assigned as a regional air defense commander (RADC) or sector air defense 
commander (SADC), the CRC establishes operating procedures for initial assignment of 
airborne targets to ADA and fighters, ensuring defensive assets are employed in mutually 
supporting roles. The AADC may delegate engagement authority to the CRC as part of 
RADC or SADC responsibilities. In a combat identification (CID)-constrained 
environment, the CRC may be the lowest tactical level with engagement authority for 
enemy air and missile threats. 
Battle Control Center. The BCC is a ground-based fixed element of the TACS, 
comprised of four major systems: a C2 processing and display system-Battle Control 
System-Fixed, primary and secondary radar capabilities, flight-plan processing and 
identification systems, and communication and data link connectivity. The BCC fuses all-
source sensor and intelligence data into a common tactical picture and disseminates 
tactical warning and attack assessment information to the appropriate users and decision-
makers. It can perform all tasks that facilitate the full spectrum of airpower including ATO 
execution, airspace management and integration, surveillance and CID, and data link 
management. The BCC can find, fix, track, and target airborne threats and exchange air 
picture data with other C2 systems and combat aircraft (to include aerospace control alert 
fighters on the ground in scramble status) through tactical data link (TDL) systems. 
Currently, the USAF employs four BCCs, located in New York, Washington, Alaska, and 
Hawaii, as the primary TAC C2 nodes for homeland defense and defense support of civil 
authorities for the Commander, North American Aerospace Defense Command, US 
Northern Command, and US Indo-Pacific Command. Under the future construct, the 
USAF is developing additional BCCs that support CCDRs that may be located outside a 
CCDR’s AO. For example, the future BCC at Robins AFB, GA will provide battle 
management for US Central Command. BCCs operate continuously to provide wide-area 
surveillance, early warning, battle management, target detection and tracking, and non-
lethal warning and weapons control functions. In the event of lost connectivity, BCCs can 
operate autonomously and provide immediate mutual support and redundancy if another 
BCC becomes inoperative.19 
 
19 For additional information on BCCs, see AFTTP 3-3.TACS, Combat Fundamentals-TACS. 
Emerging Doctrine-Wing Operations Center 
WOC concepts continue to develop and emerge. As the WOC evolves, it will likely 
constitute a TACS C2 element configured to C2 ground-based air defense (GBAD) 
capabilities in defense of main operating bases and forward operating bases 
against adversary cruise missiles and air threats. As the USAF identifies baseline 
sensors and effectors, and theaters build air base defense capabilities, emerging 
GBAD capabilities will be fielded to integrate WOCs into the AADP and empower 
RADC/SADCs to employ active defense systems. This new mission area for the 
USAF will necessitate development of new tactics, techniques, procedures, and 
employment considerations. These emerging capabilities will leverage advanced 
battle management system contributions in support of joint all-domain C2. 
 Air Force Doctrine Publication 3-0.1, Command and Control 
36 
Air Support Operations Center (ASOC). As part of the TACS ground element, the 
ASOC is responsible for planning, coordinating, controlling, and executing air operations 
that directly support ground combat forces. The ASOC can also affect counterair 
operations through coordination for SEAD missions, management of some airspace 
control measures, close air support (CAS), and others. The ASOC is usually collocated 
with the senior Army tactical echelon and coordinates operations with the permanently 
assigned tactical air control party (TACP), Army fires cell, and the AOC. 
Tactical Air Control Parties. The TACP is a subordinate operational component of the 
TACS designed to provide air liaison to land forces and for the control of aircraft. TACP 
are organized into expeditionary air support operations groups (ASOG) or air support 
operations squadrons (ASOS) that are aligned with their respective Army corps, divisions, 
or brigades. The TACP has two primary missions: advise ground commanders on the 
capabilities and limitations of air operations and provide the primary terminal attack 
control of CAS. TACP coordinate airspace coordination measures, fire support 
coordination measures, and deconflict aircraft with other fire support.20 
Air Liaison Officer (ALO). The ALO is the senior TACP member attached to a ground 
unit who functions as the primary advisor to the ground commander on air power. An ALO 
is an expert in the capabilities and limitations of air operations. The ALO plans and 
executes CAS in accordance with the ground commander’s guidance and intent. At the 
battalion (BN) level, the senior member of the TACP is called the BN ALO, a specially 
trained and experienced non-commissioned officer. Additionally, ALOs may be certified 
 
20 For additional information on TACP, see AFDP 3-03, Counterland Operations. 
Emerging Doctrine-ACIT/ISET 
The Air Force is exploring the employment of TACP outside of land or maritime 
areas of operation to extend TACS communications architecture into contested 
environments. Examples of C2 elements employed in this manner may include 
the agile control and integration team (ACIT) and integrated sensing and effects 
team (ISET). 
ACIT. The ACIT is a ground-based USAF C2 element comprised of TACP, 
functioning on behalf of the JFACC, and may combine with other C2 entities or 
elements. It relies on rapid deployment capabilities to create localized and 
dispersed nodes, providing limited command of airspace pockets and control 
(positive or procedural) for integration of joint fires across multiple domains in 
support of the air scheme of maneuver. 
ISET. The ISET is a TACP team that integrates with joint service or partner 
nations capable of employing at the forward edge of the battle area. It provides 
a tactical advantage through advanced sensing grids, establishes, or expands 
ground-based C2 mesh networks, and provides procedural control of 
net-enabled weapons, aircraft, and long-range precision fires. 
 Air Force Doctrine Publication 3-0.1, Command and Control 
37 
and qualified to serve in the JTAC role. The JTAC is a Service member, who, most often 
from a forward position, directs the action of combat aircraft engaged in CAS and other 
offensive air operations. The JTAC provides the ground commander recommendations 
on the use of CAS and its integration with ground maneuver. 
THEATER AIR CONTROL SYSTEM AIRBORNE ELEMENTS 
Airborne Warning and Air Control System. The AWACS provides the TACS with a 
flexible and capable airborne radar platform. It provides battle management and is 
normally among the first systems to arrive in theater during contingency operations. 
Through voice and data connectivity, AWACS issues threat warnings, directs aircraft on 
counterair missions, manages air refueling, provides a common tactical picture, and 
coordinates CSAR efforts. AWACS can detect and identify hostile airborne and 
surface-to-air missile (SAM) threats and assign weapon systems to engage enemy 
targets. 
AWACS may carry an airborne battle staff or airborne command element authorized to 
redirect forces under the authority of the JFACC and AADC. When employed with an 
airborne command element, AWACS can scramble and divert aircraft conducting 
counterair operations and recommend changes in air defense warning conditions. The 
AWACS can perform many, but not all, CRC functions. 
Battlefield Airborne Communications Node (BACN). The BACN platform supports 
TACS elements’ ability to unify and disseminate information by ensuring robust and 
reliable communications between C2 elements and tactical assets. BACN provides 
communications capability and waveform conversions where terrestrial services are 
restricted or unavailable through three core service categories: TDLs, voice services, and 
Internet Protocol services. 
DYNAMIC ELEMENTS 
Dynamic TACS elements are any other weapon system or entity that has a primary role 
other than C2, but that may, with appropriate certification and delegated authority, 
augment, or substitute for dedicated TACS elements. Support systems include those 
organic or opportunistic surveillance, communications, and decision-making capabilities 
that improve, extend, or expand the capabilities of the TACS. 
Mission Commander. The MC is an individual designated through the ATO process and 
delegated appropriate authorities for the execution of a JFACC designated mission. Their 
role is to lead a large Air Force flying mission from tactical planning through execution. 
They are typically not unit commanders and are operating with delegated decision 
authorities from the JFACC (i.e., NOT control or command authority). 
Airborne Non-kinetic Mission Commander "CROW.” CROWs provide airborne 
coordination with the AOC on pre-approved and dynamic EA targets. They maintain 
awareness on the status of airborne collection assets and manage the tactical execution 
of non-kinetic effects in the battlespace. 
 Air Force Doctrine Publication 3-0.1, Command and Control 
38 
Forward Air Controller (Airborne) (FAC[A]). The FAC(A) is an airborne extension of 
the TACP and is certified to perform terminal attack control to aircraft providing CAS of 
land forces. A FAC(A) provides coordination between C2 elements and CAS aircraft, 
attack briefs, airspace deconfliction, visual reconnaissance and target marking, and joint 
fire support coordination. FAC(A) operations are integrated with the ground force scheme 
of maneuver to enable rapid coordination and execution of CAS operations. 
Tactical Air Coordinator (Airborne) (TAC[A]). The TAC(A) is an extension of air 
support C2 elements. The TAC(A) provides a communication relay between the TACP, 
attack aircraft, and other elements of the TACS. The TAC(A) expedites the CAS 
aircraft-to-JTAC handoff during “heavy traffic” CAS operations. TAC(A) tasks may include 
coordination of briefs and attack times, CAS and FAC(A) handoffs to terminal attack 
controllers, relay updated threats and battle damage assessments to C2 elements, 
coordination of aircraft and surface fire support, and visual reconnaissance reports. 
CONTROL ELEMENT AUTHORITIES, ROLES, AND ORGANIZATIONAL ALIGNMENT 
Common Control Authorities. According to the nature of the operation and specific 
asset or organizational capabilities, the air component commander may delegate all or 
portions of identification, commit, engagement, and airspace control authorities to the 
CRC, AWACS, and BCC to dynamically execute commander’s guidance and intent. 
These entities are not certified to perform ATC services. The BCC may be delegated data 
link control authority. 
Common Roles and Alignment. The CRC and AWACS can accept delegated 
responsibility to execute missions and tasks for offensive and defensive air operations. 
The CRC and AWACS may be delegated RADC or SADC responsibilities and are a key 
C2 element for defensive counter-air operations. The CRC, AWACS, and BCC are under 
the operational C2 of the air component commander and vertically integrated with the 
AOC. They may be employed alone or horizontally integrated. 
COMMAND AND CONTROL TECHNOLOGY 
People, processes, and effective use of available technology enable successful C2 
for military operations. 
Technology elements tend to dominate C2 discourse because advanced technology 
characterizes American warfare. Technology attributes are important and must be 
understood before C2 can be conducted effectively. Personnel, technology, and 
processes must all come together to efficiently execute the C2 function. 
JP 6-0, Joint Communications, states “joint communications provide connectivity 
throughout the operational area, from the strategic to tactical levels, which is vital to plan, 
conduct, and sustain military operations.” It also must ensure the continuous, automated 
flow and processing of information. The joint C2 system must be interoperable, reliable, 
mobile, disciplined, survivable, and sustainable. These principles provide the foundation 
on which the Services build their systems and are applied during the planning and 
execution of military operations. The C2 system provides the JFC with the ability to 
manage the flow and processing of information. It supports the JFC’s decision-making 
 Air Force Doctrine Publication 3-0.1, Command and Control 
39 
process and provides him/her with the capability to achieve the desired effects during 
joint operations. 
In accordance with guidelines and direction from the Secretary of Defense (SecDef), each 
military department or Service, as appropriate, has the following common functions and 
responsibilities pertaining to joint operations: 
 To provide flexibility, as required, to meet changing situations and diversified 
operations with minimum disruption or delay. 
 To provide interoperable and compatible C2 systems, warfighters, and reserves of 
equipment and supplies for the effective prosecution of war and to plan for the 
expansion of peacetime communications to meet the needs of war. 
 To OT&E its C2 systems personnel and provide interoperable and compatible C2 
systems equipment for joint operations. 
 To install, operate, and maintain assigned facilities of the Defense Information 
Systems Network, including the capability of meeting the provisions of applicable 
standards. 
 To maintain mobile, transportable C2 system assets, which are under the authority of 
the Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff, in a high state of readiness. 
 The Services must provide C2 systems that can support joint operations. This is 
established as part of their mission to train and equip personnel and forces to be 
employed by the JFC. When forces are deployed for a contingency, it is too late to 
discover that C2 systems do not meet the characteristics discussed below. Failure to 
achieve joint standards among C2 systems will result in system degradation, if not 
mission failure. Coalition C2 system characteristics and requirements must also be 
considered during system procurement and contingency planning. 
TECHNOLOGICAL SUPPORT 
People, processes, and technology enable successful C2 for military operations. 
Technological C2 systems provide the commander with the ability to manage the flow 
and processing of information. It supports the commander’s decision cycle and enables 
them to achieve the desired effects during operations. 
Leveraging information-sharing technology is critical to enable battle management 
through air component C2 nodes. During Operations IRAQI FREEDOM and ENDURING 
FREEDOM, satellite communications, airborne battle management platforms, and ISR 
system feeds were merged into a common operating picture at the AOC. This provided 
the air component commander with superior situational awareness over a technologically 
inferior adversary. 
Unfortunately, future adversaries, with their competing capabilities, will likely narrow or 
erase our overwhelming technological advantage. Therefore, USAF ISR and OE data 
sensing and sharing systems will remain critical to commanders. Information sharing 
through tactical data links and emerging battle management systems will remain critical 
 Air Force Doctrine Publication 3-0.1, Command and Control 
40 
for situational awareness at the tactical level because sharing data creates a more 
detailed operational picture. In turn, maturation of sensor-agnostic sensing networks will 
improve data quality and continue to refine the OE. 
Tied to the ability to share data is the ability to sense and make sense of a complex OE 
faster and better. Artificial intelligence (AI), with the help of machine learning (ML), offers 
the promise of collating, fusing, and analyzing data flows to provide higher quality 
actionable information at the speed necessary for victory. 
Core tasks, such as network defense and defensive cyber operations, will remain critical 
in GPC. The USAF is developing C2 communications systems and networks that will be 
able to proactively maneuver between channel and spectrum, protect themselves from 
attack, resist disruptions through defensive maneuvers, and achieve seamless C2 node 
interoperability. 
Effective C2 requires processed, refined, and actionable information that must be quickly, 
securely, and reliably made available to C2 nodes to achieve a shared understanding of 
the OE and common operating picture. The Advanced Battle Management System 
(ABMS), and potential overarching capabilities such as the Department of the Air Force 
(DAF) Battle Network, will enable timely and superior decision-making by delivering 
warfighters information when and where they need it. These technological advancements 
aspire to simultaneous sensing and sense-making of vast data arrays across multiple 
domains. To achieve this goal, highly mobile battle management nodes and similar 
modular or scalable battle management nodes (e.g., tactical operations center-light-
enabled CRC and TACP) and ACITs, should share situational awareness and high-
resolution OE understanding that was typically only enjoyed in the AOC. This dispersed 
situational awareness will be a lynchpin to Distributed Control and re-emphasize that 
assured communications will remain foundational to effective C2. 
JOINT ALL-DOMAIN COMMAND AND CONTROL (JADC2) 
JADC2 is a Department of Defense (DoD) initiative aimed at developing a unified C2 
system that integrates and coordinates operations across all domains (air, land, sea, 
space, and cyber). JADC2 enables the joint force to operate at the speed of relevance, 
leveraging advanced technologies such as AI, ML, and cloud computing to rapidly sense, 
decide, and act in response to emerging threats. All-domain C2 also requires integration 
and synchronization with allies and partners, leading to combined JADC2 (CJADC2). 
JADC2 includes the art and science of decision-making to rapidly translate decisions into 
action and leverage capabilities across all domains, with mission partners, to achieve 
operational and informational advantage in both competition and conflict. It is the natural 
extension of C2 across domains and functional components and is essential for JADO. 
The USAF’s vision for JADC2 connects distributed sensors, shooters, and data across all 
domains, to all forces, to enable mission command for the scaled, coordinated exercise 
of authority to integrate planning and ensure the convergence of effects across a dynamic 
battlespace. 
 Air Force Doctrine Publication 3-0.1, Command and Control 
41 
To actualize JADC2, C2 constructs, processes, and systems compress decision-making 
cycles and facilitate the convergence of effects across domains to enable globally 
integrated operations. Elements of JADC2 include a sensing grid, advanced networking, 
decision-making, and effects delivery. These elements provide the capability to observe 
the environment, share information to make sense of the environment, enhance decision-
making, and converge effects to overwhelm an adversary. 
JADC2 requires efficient management of resources and sophisticated information 
gathering, processing, and sharing across domains. JADC2 tools and methods enable 
information advantage and decision superiority. Where available, analytic modeling and 
simulation tools should be employed to support and enhance commander 
decision-making and inform strategy choices (e.g., apportionment). 
To ensure convergence of effects, the planning process for the ATO should expand to 
support joint all-domain planning and execution. JADC2 will orchestrate this convergence 
through an integrated tasking order (ITO) employing assigned, attached, and supporting 
forces, capabilities, and effects. The ITO should incorporate and synchronize capabilities 
across components and domains to allow for mutual support and convergence of forces 
or effects. Knowledge of joint force capabilities, a common lexicon, common data 
standards, and the ability to communicate across echelons enables DAF forces to 
integrate across domains. 
 Air Force Doctrine Publication 3-0.1, Command and Control 
42 
Human-Machine Teaming. A key component of JADC2 is the incorporation of 
human-machine teaming to leverage the benefits of emerging technology. Human-
machine teaming, as part of the technological element of C2 systems, optimizes a 
commander’s decision cycle and influences the major C2 activities by increasing the 
speed and accuracy of decision-quality data. Aspects of human-machine teaming include 
machine-to-machine communication and predictive modeling. Employing these systems 
effectively requires a framework for understanding their employment. Commanders 
should understand and balance the benefits and risks of human-machine relationships. 
Human-machine teaming may aid all forms of military decision-making. However, 
commanders and operators should exercise appropriate levels of human judgment, 
especially for decisions regarding the use of force. To build appropriate levels of 
understanding, trust, and skepticism with their machines, Airmen should train as part of 
human-machine teams. 
Advanced Battle Management System 
ABMS is intended to be a holistic “system of systems” designed to seamlessly 
and securely share data across multiple weapons systems. ABMS, and 
overarching DAF architectures such as the DAF Battle Network, will be critical 
enablers to the DoD’s combined and joint all domain command and control 
(C/JADC2) effort to connect sensors and shooters around the globe. 
ABMS aims to provide a cloud-based, AI-powered C2 system that integrates 
and correlates data from across the joint force. ABMS enables the rapid 
detection, identification, and engagement of targets across all domains, 
providing a decisive advantage in combat. ABMS also enables the integration 
of new capabilities, such as autonomous systems and hypersonic weapons, 
into the joint force. 
 
 Air Force Doctrine Publication 3-0.1, Command and Control 
43 
INTEROPERABILITY 
Interoperability is the ability of C2 systems to exchange information, allowing warfighters 
to operate effectively together. Interoperability is best achieved by adhering to technology 
and process standards that allow information flow. The focus on multinational operations 
continues to challenge us, particularly in security issues and technology gaps. Every effort 
should be made to share the needed information efficiently among the multinational 
forces participating in an operation. 
To achieve interoperability, the DoD has established the Joint Technical Architecture 
(JTA) and the Communications Systems Support (CSS) architectural framework. The 
framework implements a standard DoD architecture that provides the needed structure 
while systems are in the developmental and system engineering phases of acquisition. 
The JTA identifies a common set of mandatory standards for USAF C2 systems, ensuring 
interoperability with joint and combined systems. 
RELIABILITY AND REDUNDANCY 
Redundant C2 systems provide the ability for alternative C2 systems to continue 
operations in the event of failure or damage to the primary system. C2 system redundancy 
begins with planning, balancing the goal of mission success against natural failures. High-
value C2 systems that are difficult to back up, such as the AOC, are good candidates for 
redundancy planning. 
COMMUNICATIONS CAPABILITY 
Commanders must have access to information to exercise the Air Force’s distinctive 
capabilities. Commanders must be provided with tools for decision-making through 
effective C2, exploitation, and protection of information regardless of form or function. The 
objective of communications and information services is to create a global and 
transparent interface to C2 centers and to provide users with the information necessary 
to carry out the mission. 
USEABLE DATA FOR DECISION-MAKING 
Commanders must have actionable information that has been sorted and processed. 
Today's information systems can process massive amounts of data and forward that data 
in near-real time. During a contingency, a commander usually cannot sort through a vast 
amount of data. The commander's staff must analyze and sift through the data to forward 
information the commander actually needs to enable a decision. Ultimately, data science, 
including ML and other kinds of artificial intelligence, can aid in data analysis and help the 
commander find key insights. 
KEY NETWORKS 
C2 throughout the DoD relies on a series of networks to provide conduits for the rapid 
exchange of information among nodes. The networks are provided under the aegis of the 
Defense Information Systems Agency (DISA) or the Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA), 
but individual network facilities are furnished, installed, operated, and maintained by one 
or another of the Service or functional components. For network facilities to be 
 Air Force Doctrine Publication 3-0.1, Command and Control 
44 
interoperable, they must adhere to protocol and performance standards established by 
DISA or DIA. 
Cloud Computing and Cybersecurity. Cloud computing has revolutionized the way 
military operations are supported, providing on-demand access to a shared pool of 
computing resources. Cloud services enable rapid scalability, improved collaboration, 
and enhanced cybersecurity. Cybersecurity is critical to ensuring the integrity and 
confidentiality of C2 systems and data. Advanced threat detection and response 
capabilities, such as AI-powered cybersecurity systems, are essential to protecting 
against increasingly sophisticated cyber threats. 
5G and Beyond. The advent of 5G networks and beyond has transformed the way 
military communications are conducted. 5G networks offer faster data rates, lower 
latency, and greater connectivity, enabling advanced capabilities such as augmented and 
virtual reality, autonomous systems, and enhanced situational awareness. 
Tactical Digital Information Links and Gateways. Tactical digital information links 
(TADILs) are standardized communication links, approved by the Joint Chiefs of Staff, 
suitable for the transmission of digital information. All Services, including the Air Force, 
use these links to support their doctrinal requirements to exchange data and information 
quickly and in a readily recognizable format. Link 16 has been designated as the primary 
data link for use in the combat air forces. 
Installation Mapping and Visualization for C2 Operations. Commanders and planners 
use a common installation picture for mission success. Installations represent the 
underlying platform for USAF missions. Installation operations also require disciplined 
creation, management, and sharing of critical georeferenced information through modern 
mapping processes. The USAF’s GeoBase program satisfies this critical need across the 
installation mission spectrum, providing a data service that can be simultaneously 
accessed and exploited on Air Force networks by any number of base and HHQ 
organizations. 
In conclusion, technology plays a critical role in enabling effective C2 for military 
operations. The integration of advanced technologies, such as ABMS, JADC2, AI, ML, 
cloud computing, and 5G networks, has transformed the way military operations are 
planned, executed, and sustained. The importance of interoperability, reliability, and 
cybersecurity cannot be overstated, as they are essential to ensuring the success of 
military operations. 
 
 
 Air Force Doctrine Publication 3-0.1, Command and Control 
45 
APPENDIX A: COMMAND AND CONTROL TERMINOLOGY 
COMMAND 
Command is the authority that a commander in the armed forces lawfully exercises over 
subordinates by virtue of rank or assignment. Command is exercised in both the 
administrative and operational branches of the chain of command (e.g., a MAJCOM 
commander is in the administrative branch, a joint force functional component 
commander is in the operational branch). Some commanders are dual-hatted. They 
command through both the operational and administrative branches (e.g., Commander, 
Pacific Air Forces (COMPACAF) is a commander in the administrative branch [MAJCOM] 
and a commander in the operational branch [COMAFFOR]). This doctrine focuses on 
the operational branch of the chain of command and refers to command as it 
relates to the joint force structure. 
CONTROL 
Control is authority exercised by a commander over part of the activities of subordinates 
or other organizations.21 The delegation of specified elements of command authority 
may be referred to as delegating control authority. This exchange is limited to 
commanders because it is the delegation of authority in a commander-
to-commander relationship. 
In the operational branch and joint force structure, control authorities are often classified 
by COMREL which defines specific authorities that empower subordinate commanders 
to complete their assigned mission. The primary relationships are combatant command 
(COCOM), OPCON, TACON, and support. Each relationship has authorities that are 
inherent in the preceding level (i.e., TACON is inherent in OPCON, and OPCON is 
inherent in COCOM). COCOM is the overarching authority granted to CCDRs and cannot 
be delegated. The figure “Command Relationships Synopsis for JP 1 Volume 2, The Joint 
Force” depicts the hierarchical nature of COMREL. A further discussion of COMREL is 
presented in the next section. 
COMREL such as OPCON and TACON describe varying levels of authority that may be 
delegated to subordinate commanders. However, commanders are not limited to these 
specific relationships. In general, any degree (including the full amount) of OPCON 
authority may be delegated to a subordinate commander. Similarly, there may be 
authorities not described in OPCON or TACON (because they are often unnecessarily 
broad, or too narrowly focused on the assignment of forces) to fully capture the type and 
scope of authority required by subordinate USAF commanders. 
 
21 For the full joint definition of control, see JP 1, Volume 2, The Joint Force. 
 Air Force Doctrine Publication 3-0.1, Command and Control 
46 
COMMANDERS 
In the operational branch, commanders possess both command authority and 
control authority. For example, Air Force Instruction 1-2 states that “in addition to 
leading people to accomplish an assigned mission, commanders have the lawful authority 
and responsibility to promote and safeguard the morale, physical well-being, and the 
general welfare of persons under their command.” These command responsibilities are 
not related to directly accomplishing a mission and the authority to exercise them is by 
virtue of assignment. To accomplish their assigned mission, the same commander may 
be delegated OPCON from their superior commander to organize and employ their 
forces. This is an example of delegated control authority. The delegation of control 
authority empowers a subordinate commander to employ forces. Therefore, 
commanders have both command authorities AND control authorities that enable 
them to lead their units to accomplish their assigned missions. 
COMMAND RELATIONSHIPS 
Organizations require clear and effective COMREL and authorities. A working 
understanding of terminology is essential to understanding the relationships among 
Command Relationships Synopsis from JP 1 Volume 2, The 
Joint Force 
 Air Force Doctrine Publication 3-0.1, Command and Control 
47 
components and the responsibilities inherent in organizations. 22 
COMBATANT COMMAND 
COCOM is a command authority, codified in Title 10, United States Code, Section 164, 
is defined as “nontransferable command authority, which cannot be delegated, of a 
combatant commander to perform those functions of command over assigned forces 
involving organizing and employing commands and forces; assigning tasks; designating 
objectives; and giving authoritative direction over all aspects of military operations, joint 
training, and logistics necessary to accomplish the missions assigned to the command.” 
COCOM can never be delegated, but many of the authorities that come with it (OPCON, 
TACON) can be delegated to subordinate commanders. 
COCOM is exercised by CCDRs as directed by the President or the SecDef. In turn, 
COCOM authorities should be exercised through the commanders of subordinate 
organizations such as subordinate JFCs and Service or functional component 
commanders. COCOM provides full authority to organize and employ commands and 
forces as the CCDR considers necessary to accomplish assigned missions. 
OPERATIONAL CONTROL 
OPCON is the authority to perform those functions of command over subordinate forces 
involving organizing and employing commands and forces, assigning tasks, designating 
objectives, and giving authoritative direction necessary to accomplish the mission. A 
CCDR can delegate OPCON to a subordinate commander. It does not include 
authoritative direction for logistics or matters of administration, discipline, internal 
organization, or unit training. 
OPCON should be exercised through subordinate commanders, such as subordinate 
JFCs and Service or functional component commanders. Normally, the JFC exercises 
OPCON of assigned and attached Air Force forces through the COMAFFOR. 
TACTICAL CONTROL 
TACON is the authority over forces that is limited to the detailed direction and control of 
movements or maneuvers within the operational area necessary to accomplish missions 
or tasks assigned. 
TACON may be delegated to and exercised by commanders at any echelon at or below 
the level of CCMD. TACON provides sufficient authority for controlling and directing the 
application of force or tactical use of combat support assets within the assigned mission 
or task. TACON does not provide organizational authority or authoritative direction for 
administrative and logistic support. 
 
22 For additional information on command relationships, see JP 1 Volume 2, The Joint Force. 
 Air Force Doctrine Publication 3-0.1, Command and Control 
48 
ADMINISTRATIVE CONTROL 
Administrative control (ADCON) is defined as the direction or exercise of authority over 
subordinate or other organizations with respect to administration and support. This 
includes the organization of Service forces, control of resources and equipment, 
personnel management, unit logistics, individual and unit training, readiness, 
mobilization, demobilization, discipline, and other matters not included in the operational 
missions of the subordinate or other organizations. 
ADCON is not a warfighting authority like that found in COCOM, OPCON, TACON, or 
support relationships. Normally the COMAFFOR exercises ADCON over assigned USAF 
personnel, and at least those elements of ADCON that are necessary to ensure mission 
accomplishment over those USAF personnel attached to the USAF component 
command. It is through ADCON that the COMAFFOR provides properly organized, 
trained, and equipped USAF forces. 
SUPPORT 
Support is a command relationship that aids, protects, complements, or sustains another 
force. It is used when neither OPCON nor TACON is appropriate. The SecDef specifies 
support relationships between CCDRs. The CCDR may establish support relationships 
between components assigned or attached to the command. 
There are four defined categories of support that a CCDR may direct over assigned or 
attached forces to ensure the appropriate level of support is provided to accomplish 
mission objectives: 
General Support. Support given to the supported force as a whole rather than to a 
particular subdivision thereof. 
Mutual Support. Support which units render each other against an enemy because of 
their assigned tasks, their position relative to each other and to the enemy, and their 
inherent capabilities. 
Direct Support. A mission requiring a force to support another specific force and 
authorizing it to answer directly to the supported force’s request for assistance. 
Close Support. That action of the supporting force against targets or objectives that are 
sufficiently near the supported force as to require detailed integration or coordination of 
the supporting action with the fire, movement, or other actions of the supported force. 
COORDINATING AUTHORITY 
Coordinating authority is defined as the commander or individual who has the authority 
to require consultation between the specific functions or activities involving forces of two 
or more Services, joint force components, or forces of the same Service or agencies, but 
does not have the authority to compel agreement. If an essential agreement cannot be 
obtained, the matter is referred to the appointing authority. Coordinating authority is a 
consultation relationship, not an authority through which command may be exercised. 
 Air Force Doctrine Publication 3-0.1, Command and Control 
49 
DIRECT LIAISON AUTHORIZED 
DIRLAUTH is defined as that authority granted by a commander (any level) to a 
subordinate to directly consult or coordinate an action with a command or agency within 
or outside of the granting command. 
 
 
 Air Force Doctrine Publication 3-0.1, Command and Control 
50 
APPENDIX B: DISTRIBUTED CONTROL CONSIDERATIONS 
Early understandings of Distributed Control emerged in doctrine prior to the 2021 release 
of AFDP 1. The 2015 version of “Volume 1, Basic Doctrine,” described C2 as a continuum 
“between direct control and total autonomy.” This notion of Distributed Control was 
influenced by recent history, where the theater air component commander typically 
retained most of the authority given to them by a CCDR. This effectively centralized the 
decision-making and direction of C2 activities, particularly through the AOC. 
Unfortunately, disruption or destruction of the command staff and/or AOC therefore poses 
a significant vulnerability to USAF operations. Recognizing the vulnerability posed by this 
centralized approach, the USAF aims to distribute decision-making, direction, and 
conduct of C2 in specified operations to subordinate commanders to ensure survivability 
and flexibility. The following considerations may help guide commanders through 
distributing control. 
How do commanders ensure that subordinate commanders understand the scope 
of their delegated authority and the commander's intent? 
 Use clear and concise language in written orders and verbal briefings to convey the 
commander's intent and scope of authority. 
 Conduct regular briefings to ensure shared understanding and alignment. 
 Establish a common operational picture and share situational awareness to facilitate 
understanding of the OE. 
 Use the MTO technique that provides a clear understanding of the commander's 
intent, constraints, and restraints. 
 Encourage open communication and feedback to clarify misunderstandings or 
concerns. 
What mechanisms are in place to prevent misunderstandings or misinterpretations 
of delegated authority, and how are they addressed?23 
 Establish a clear chain of command and defined decision-making processes to 
minimize confusion. 
 Implement a system of checks-and-balances to ensure that delegated authority is 
exercised within established boundaries. 
 Conduct regular reviews and assessments of delegated authority to identify potential 
issues or areas for improvement. 
 Foster a culture of transparency, accountability, and open communication to 
encourage reporting of misunderstandings or concerns. 
 
23 There are no pre-existing mechanisms to address this, the following recommendations should be adopted 
to help mitigate these potential issues. 
 Air Force Doctrine Publication 3-0.1, Command and Control 
51 
 Establish 
a 
process 
for 
rapidly 
addressing 
and 
resolving 
conflicts 
or 
misunderstandings that arise from delegated authority. 
 Conduct back-briefs and receipt-of-orders confirmations with subordinate echelons. 
How does the Air Force balance the need for centralized command with the need 
for Distributed Control and decentralized execution in complex, dynamic 
operations? 
 Implement a hybrid approach that combines centralized command with Distributed 
Control and decentralized execution, depending on the operational context. 
 Establish clear lines of authority and decision-making processes to ensure 
coordination and synchronization across various levels of command. 
 Use advanced technologies, such as human-machine teaming with associated data 
analytics and AI, to enhance situational awareness and facilitate decentralized 
decision-making. 
 Train and educate commanders and staff to operate effectively in distributed and 
decentralized C2 structures. 
 Develop and exercise contingency plans to adapt to changing operational 
circumstances. 
What role does technology and communication systems play in enabling 
Distributed Control and decentralized execution, and how do they impact the 
commander's ability to exercise authority? 
 Leverage advanced communication systems, such as satellite communications and 
tactical networks, to enable real-time information sharing and coordination. 
 Implement data analytics and AI-powered tools to enhance situational awareness and 
facilitate decision-making. 
 Utilize C2 systems that enable distributed and decentralized execution, such as the 
Air Force's ABMS. 
 Develop and exercise procedures for operating in a degraded or denied 
communication environment. 
 
 Air Force Doctrine Publication 3-0.1, Command and Control 
52 
APPENDIX C: COMMAND AND CONTROL ACTIVITY 
CONSIDERATIONS 
The following section provides additional considerations to guide the C2 activities. It 
accompanies the overarching principles discussed in Chapter 2. 
PLANNING CONSIDERATIONS 
At subordinate echelons, planners should evaluate how their echelon’s planning fits into 
the overall operational design. Subordinate commanders should leverage HHQ guidance 
to provide sufficient intent at their echelon of command. This approach should answer the 
question: “How do we take operational objectives and translate them into tactical tasks?”24 
 Design is iterative and drives planning, with an understanding that it is informed by 
assessment. 
 With an understanding of the OE, planners can work backward from military and 
national end-states/objectives to create lines of effort/lines of operations that achieve 
desired objectives. 
 Planning should include the Airman’s perspective. The Airmen’s perspective seeks 
to establish a cohesive and coherent link between objectives, effects, tasks, and 
actions to ensure all echelons are aligned with strategic objectives and the desired 
end-state. 
PREPARING CONSIDERATIONS 
Preparing is a critical component of the C2 process, bridging the gap between planning 
and execution. It ensures that all stakeholders are aligned, resources are allocated 
effectively, and plans are refined to achieve the desired outcome. Effective preparation is 
essential for successful airpower operations. It requires careful attention to detail, 
effective communication, and a deep understanding of the OE. 
 Ensure a seamless transition. Commanders must prioritize coordination and 
refinement of plans to ensure a seamless transition from planning, preparing, and 
execution. This involves sharing information, gaining consensus, and optimizing 
operations among superior, subordinate, and parallel forces. Key indicators of a 
successful transition include timely and accurate exchange of information, clear 
understanding of tasks and responsibilities, availability of required resources and 
support, and effective communication and coordination among different units and 
agencies. 
 Build trust and agreement. Effective preparation relies on building trust and 
agreements among different units and stakeholders. This is achieved through clear 
communication channels and protocols, open and transparent information sharing, a 
culture of mutual respect and cooperation, standardized processes and procedures, 
 
24 For additional design and planning considerations, see AFDP 5-0, Planning, and JP 5-0, Joint Planning. 
 Air Force Doctrine Publication 3-0.1, Command and Control 
53 
and regular coordination meetings and briefings. 
 Mitigate challenges. Common challenges during preparation include resource 
constraints, weather or environmental factors, and changes in the OE. These 
challenges can be mitigated through thorough risk assessments and contingency 
planning, developing flexible and adaptable plans, maintaining situational awareness 
through real-time intelligence and surveillance, prioritizing tasks, allocating resources 
effectively, and establishing clear decision-making processes and authorities. 
 Refine the plan. Refining the plan is critical to ensuring its relevance and 
effectiveness in response to changing circumstances. This involves assessing the 
impact of changes on the overall mission objective, evaluating the feasibility and risks 
associated with changes, coordinating with affected units and stakeholders, and 
ensuring that changes are communicated effectively and in a timely manner. 
 Create interoperable tools. Interoperability of tools is essential for effective 
preparation, enabling the seamless exchange of information and coordination across 
different systems and units. This allows for expedited and accurate data exchanges, 
enhanced situational awareness, improved decision-making and coordination, and 
increased speed and agility in response to changing circumstances. 
 Distributed Control. During the preparing activity of the C2 process, Distributed 
Control is exercised by delegating C2 authorities to subordinate commanders, 
defining the boundaries and limits of their authority, and establishing decision-making 
processes and protocols. This critical step ensures that subordinate commanders 
have the necessary autonomy and resources to achieve their objectives. By working 
out potential issues and delegating C2 authorities during preparation, commanders 
can ensure that Distributed Control is exercised in a way that is flexible, agile, and 
responsive to changing circumstances, ultimately leading to more effective and 
successful operations. 
 Decentralize execution. The preparing activity supports decentralized execution by 
providing clear guidance and intent from HHQ, establishing a common operational 
picture and shared understanding, enabling subordinate commanders to make 
decisions within their authority, and facilitating coordination and synchronization 
across different units and levels of command. 
 Account for uncertainty. The preparing activity accounts for uncertainty and adapts 
to changing circumstances through continuous assessment and monitoring of the 
OE, maintaining a flexible and adaptable plan, establishing clear decision-making 
processes and authorities, encouraging open communication and coordination 
among units and stakeholders, and conducting regular refinement and updating of 
the plan. 
EXECUTION CONSIDERATIONS 
Traditionally, the air component commander directs the execution and deconfliction of all 
air forces and capabilities made available by the JFC. Components and supporting 
commanders execute and recommend changes as appropriate while adapting to 
 Air Force Doctrine Publication 3-0.1, Command and Control 
54 
emerging JFC and component requirements. During execution, the air component 
commander is the command authority for revising tasks of service and joint air forces. C2 
systems are used to coordinate and deconflict changes with the appropriate agencies or 
components. Ground or airborne MCs may be delegated authority to redirect 
tasks/sorties/missions made available to higher priority tasks or targets, as necessary. It 
is essential that all affected commanders and forces are notified of redirected missions 
impacting their planning and execution. Additionally, the following list describes principles 
for successful execution. 
 Commanders apply operational art. In execution, operational art is making 
decisions before they are obvious or easy while adapting to dynamic change. 
Commanders should navigate through imperfect information and unclear 
circumstances, make timely decisions, and issue deliberate orders. 
 C2 in execution should be objective-based and effects-focused. Battle 
management should monitor and adjust tasks and actions to create the desired 
effects that accomplish assigned objectives. 
 Effective C2 in execution is directly related to the time necessary for 
commanders to make decisions. The speed of the commander’s decision cycle 
must rapidly increase to shorten the time required to conduct the C2 process. War is 
competitive and it is not absolute speed that matters, but speed relative to the enemy. 
The aim is to be faster than the enemy, which means interfering with the enemy’s C2 
and streamlining our own. The speed differential does not necessarily have to be a 
large one. A small advantage exploited repeatedly can quickly lead to decisive 
results. 
 Commanders execute as planned or rapidly modify. Inherent in execution is 
deciding whether to execute planned actions (such as phases, branches, and 
sequels) or to modify the plan based on unforeseen opportunities or threats. 
 Decentralized execution permits the flexibility to realize tactical success. This 
concept supports the inherent flexibility and versatility of airpower, giving 
commanders the tools to adapt to changing circumstances while remaining focused 
on operational objectives. 
 Effective execution requires leaders trained in independent decision-making, 
aggressiveness, and risk taking in an environment of mission command. Situations 
may change rapidly. The commander’s envisioned operations from planning may 
bear little resemblance to actual events in execution. Subordinate commanders need 
maximum latitude to take advantage of situations and meet the higher commander’s 
intent when the original order no longer applies. 
 Commanders fight the enemy, not the plan. A plan provides a reasonable forecast 
of execution. However, it remains a starting point, not an exact script to follow. 
Commanders should be mindful of deviations from the plan, but the intent should be 
to accomplish objectives. 
 Air Force Doctrine Publication 3-0.1, Command and Control 
55 
 Execution actions take place within a defined timeframe. This timeframe usually 
extends from whenever an order is given to execute the governing plan, to the point 
when the commander has decided that the operation can be terminated. 
 Execution encompasses the tasking cycle and commander’s battle rhythm. 
Execution is the deliberate cycle of command, staff, and unit activities to integrate 
and synchronize current and future operations. 
ASSESSING CONSIDERATIONS 
The following principles should guide the commander and the staff throughout 
assessment.25 
 Make commander centric. The commander’s information requirements drive 
operational assessment. 
 Involve subordinate commanders. Assessments are more effective when used to 
support conversations between commanders at different echelons. Operation 
assessments link echelons of command by identifying the activities and impacts 
critical to success and sharing the assessment methods used to shape operational 
decisions. A common understanding of operational priorities allows subordinate 
commanders to directly communicate their most relevant information. 
 Integrate staffs. Staff integration is crucial to planning and executing effective 
assessments. Integrating perspectives from across the staff should minimize errors 
that arise from limited focus (i.e., duplication of effort, incorrect identification of 
causes, or insufficient information to prioritize issues by level of impact). 
 Integrate the planning process and battle rhythm. To deliver information at the 
right time, the operation assessment should be synchronized with the commander’s 
decision cycle. The assessment planning steps occur concurrently with the steps of 
the AFPP.26 The resulting assessment plan (products or results) should support the 
command’s battle rhythm. 
 Utilize external sources of information. Operation assessment should allow the 
commander and staff to integrate HHQ information that updates the understanding of 
the OE to reduce risk and plan more effective operations. To this end, commanders 
and staff should ensure security classifications, foreign disclosure policy, and 
information sharing systems lend themselves to coordination with joint and coalition 
partners. 
 Build credibility and transparency. Assessment reports should cite all sources of 
information used to build the report. As much as possible, sources and assessment 
results should be unbiased. All methods used and limitations in the collection of 
information and any assumptions used to link evidence to conclusions should be 
 
25 For additional information on assessment in general, see AFTTP 3-2.87, MTTP for Operation 
Assessment. 
26 For additional information on AFPP, see AFDP 5-0. 
 Air Force Doctrine Publication 3-0.1, Command and Control 
56 
clearly described in the assessment report. 
 Continuously assess. While an operation assessment product may be developed 
on a specific schedule, assessment is continuous in any operation. The information 
collected and analyzed can be used to inform planning, execution, and assessment. 
Common Assessment Pitfalls. Significant challenges that staffs must often overcome 
to enable an effective operation assessment activity include: 
 Not integrating assessment into planning and execution from the outset. The 
most successful staffs are those who routinely integrate and implement assessment 
activity at the onset of the planning process. Concurrently considering operational 
assessment during planning supports the development of well-written objectives and 
associated conditions or effects. Failing to consider how to assess an operation 
during planning can lead to objectives that are not assessable and tasks that are not 
tied to or support operational objectives. 
 Failure to analyze before acting. The assessment process, which includes 
understanding of the OE, requires the staff to fully understand the operational 
approach. The staff should expand the scope of assessment beyond just flying 
activity, and account for all operations of the command. The staff should consider 
leveraging already existing assessments and how the assessment of a specific plan 
contributes to the overall decision cycle of the command’s HHQ. 
 Lacking the commander’s vision. The commander’s understanding of the OE is 
driven by continual interaction with commanders at all levels, mission partners, and 
battle space circulation. Staffs should leverage the collection management process 
and assessment requirements to contribute meaningfully to the commander’s 
understanding of the OE.  
 Inadequate facilitation of commander’s decision-making. The staff must consider 
what kinds of decisions the commander will have to make to effectively C2 their 
forces. Optimally, assessment recommendations should facilitate the commander’s 
ability to provide guidance and direction to subordinates, request additional support, 
and recommend higher prioritization from HHQ.  
 Focusing on measures of performance without developing measures of 
effectiveness.27 
 Lacking advocacy or command interest. Senior staff needs to ensure the 
commander appreciates the value of assessment to inform decisions and drive 
operations. 
 Failure to incorporate the operational assessment process. The operation 
assessment process helps frame the precise definition of tasks, desired effects, 
objectives, and end-states. It gives the commander’s staff a method for selecting the 
information and intelligence requirements (including the commander’s critical 
 
27 For additional information on measures of performance, see AFDP 5-0. 
 Air Force Doctrine Publication 3-0.1, Command and Control 
57 
information requirements) that best support decision-making. Staffs should assess 
the progress of ongoing operations toward the desired end-state. 
 
 Air Force Doctrine Publication 3-0.1, Command and Control 
58 
APPENDIX D: BATTLE RHYTHM ORGANIZATION 
The battle rhythm is a routine cycle of command and staff activities intended to 
synchronize current and future operations in accordance with the commander’s decision 
cycle. The battle rhythm provides the structure for managing the HQ’s most important 
internal resource, the time of the commander and staff personnel. A stable battle rhythm 
facilitates effective decision-making, efficient staff actions, and management of 
information across all echelons. 
A battle rhythm is essentially a schedule of important events that should also be 
synchronized with other levels of command. The battle rhythm is commander-centric, and 
all efforts of the staff must be directed toward support of decision-making. Generally, the 
battle rhythm consists of a series of meetings, report requirements, and other activities. 
TERMS 
Battle rhythm: A deliberate, daily schedule of command, staff, and unit activities 
intended to maximize use of time and synchronize staff actions. 
Board: An organized group of individuals within a headquarters, appointed and tasked 
by the commander (or other authority), that meets with the purpose of gaining guidance 
or decision. 
Cell: A subordinate organization formed around a specific process, capability, or activity 
within a designated larger organization of a headquarters. 
Center: An enduring organization, with a supporting staff, designed to perform a function 
within a headquarters. 
Planning team: A functional element within a headquarters established to solve 
problems related to a specific task or requirement and which dissolves upon completion 
of the assigned task. 
Working group: An enduring or ad hoc organization within a headquarters consisting of 
a core functional group and other staff and component representatives whose purpose is 
to provide analysis on the specific function to users. 
Wing A-Staff Battle Rhythm Organizational Teams and Activities 
Commanders determine the specific boards, centers, cells, and working groups 
that are necessary to inform their decision cycle. While many joint and component 
organizations have established battle rhythm elements, the USAF is actively 
developing what elements are necessary at the wing level. In general, most 
organizations require working groups to provide functional analysis, centers to 
perform enduring functions, and boards to gain guidance or decisions. Wing 
commanders should tailor these battle rhythm elements to meet the needs of their 
assigned operations and the associated decision cycle. 
 Air Force Doctrine Publication 3-0.1, Command and Control 
59 
BATTLE RHYTHM DEVELOPMENT 
There are several critical functions for a battle rhythm, these include, but are not limited 
to, the following: 
 Provide a routine for internal staff interaction and coordination. 
 Provide a routine for interaction between the commander, staff, other organizations, 
and HHQ. 
 Synchronize staff organizational activities. 
 Facilitate planning by the staff and decision-making by the commander--support the 
commander’s decision cycle. 
The battle rhythm can be created in two distinct steps, as shown in the following figure. 
First, start with a logical arrangement of cross-functional organizations around the 
commander’s decision requirements with decision boards as culminating events. Second, 
lay out these cross-functional organizations events on a calendar. 
 
 
 Air Force Doctrine Publication 3-0.1, Command and Control 
60 
BATTLE RHYTHM MANAGEMENT 
Typically, the battle rhythm is managed by the COS. An effective battle rhythm 
requires active management and staff discipline. The COS should establish a deliberate 
battle rhythm control process and structure that achieves and maintains effective decision 
support for the commander and shared understanding among the staff by: 
 Establishing a battle rhythm management and change control process that requires 
proponents for cross-functional staff elements to justify event establishment (i.e., 
purpose and authority, agenda, proposed membership, event location and timing, 
required product inputs and outputs) or modification. 
 Documenting and routinely evaluating critical path information flows and identifying 
opportunities to streamline or eliminate unnecessary or redundant events and 
processes. 
 Regularly checking battle rhythm events to ensure the time of the staff, directors, or 
command group is in support of the commander’s decision cycle and/or staff shared 
understanding. Meeting chairpersons should research and understand techniques for 
effective meeting discipline, such as establishing a clear agenda that supports 
processing inputs in support of the commander’s decision cycle and selectively 
limiting attendance to essential personnel. 
 Placing accountability on directors for developing effective critical path/information 
exchange flows with clear inputs and outputs for their respective functions and 
supporting cross-functional battle rhythm events. 
 Maintaining awareness of critical staff positions that are in high demand for event 
participation. Additionally, directors should not automatically be assigned to 
participate in every cross-functional battle rhythm event. Instead, event membership 
should be based on who has the delegated authority to make decisions. For example, 
some high-demand subject matter experts are important members of events but will 
likely not be able to support multiple events at the same time. 
 Providing discipline in the battle rhythm execution necessary to maintain sufficient 
unscheduled time. Without a conscious effort to preserve valuable time for both the 
commander and staff to think and work, the battle rhythm can become overwhelming 
and counterproductive. 
 
 Air Force Doctrine Publication 3-0.1, Command and Control 
61 
REFERENCES 
All websites accessed 11 December 2024. 
Doctrine can be accessed through links provided at: https://www.doctrine.af.mil/ 
US AIR FORCE DOCTRINE: https://www.doctrine.af.mil/ 
 AFDP 1, The Air Force 
 AFDP 1-1, Mission Command 
 AFDP 3-0, Operations 
 AFDP 3-52, Airspace Control 
 AFDP 5-0, Planning 
JOINT DOCTRINE 
Joint Electronic Library (JEL): https://www.jcs.mil/Doctrine/ 
JEL+: https://jdeis.js.mil/jdeis/index.jsp?pindex=2 
 JP 1 Volume 1, Joint Warfighting 
 JP 1 Volume 2, The Joint Force 
 JP 3-0, Joint Campaigns and Operations 
 JP 3-09, Joint Fire Support 
 JP 3-09.3, Joint Close Air Support 
 JP 3-30, Joint Air Operations 
 JP 5-0, Joint Planning 
 JP 6-0, Joint Communications 
TACTICAL DOCTRINE 
Multi-Service Tactics, Techniques, and Procedures (MTTPs): https://www.alssa.mil/ 
 AFTTP 3-2.17, MTTP for the Theater Air-Ground System 
 AFTTP 3-2.87, MTTP for Operation Assessment 
Air Force Weapon System TTPs (AFTTPs): 
https://intelshare.intelink.gov/sites/561jts/SitePages/Home.aspx 
 AFTTP 3-3.AOC, Combat Fundamentals Air Operations Center 
 AFTTP 3-3.TACS, Combat Fundamentals-TACS 
MISCELLANEOUS PUBLICATIONS 
 DAFMAN 13-1AOC, Volume 3, Operational Procedures-Air Operations Center (AOC)  
 ADP 5-0, The Operations Process 
