BY ORDER OF THE SECRETARY  
OF THE AIR FORCE 
 
AIR FORCE INSTRUCTION 17-140 
29 JUNE 2018 
Cyberspace 
ARCHITECTING 
COMPLIANCE WITH THIS PUBLICATION IS MANDATORY 
 
ACCESSIBILITY:  Publications and forms are available for downloading or ordering on the 
e-Publishing website at www.e-Publishing.af.mil 
RELEASABILITY:  There are no releasability restrictions on this publication 
 
 
OPR: SAF/CIO A6SA 
 
Supersedes: 
AFI33-401, 17 May 2011 
Certified by: SAF/CIO A6S  
(Maj Gen Patrick C. Higby) 
Pages: 37 
 
 
This Air Force Instruction (AFI) implements Air Force Policy Directive (AFPD) 17-1, 
Information Dominance Governance and Management, and Headquarters Air Force Mission 
Directive (HAF MD) 1-26, Chief Information Dominance and Chief Information Officer.  It 
provides guidance for developing, maintaining, and implementing sound integrated and 
interoperable architectures across the Air Force; making architecture data discoverable, 
accessible, understandable, linked, and trustworthy; and ensuring interoperability for Information 
Technology (IT) and National Security System (NSS) systems and services that are Air Force 
only and not subject to Joint/Department of Defense (DoD) interoperability processes. 
This AFI is consistent with DoDI 5000.75, Business Systems Requirements and Acquisition; 
Chairman Joint Chiefs of Staff Instruction (CJCSI) 3170.01I, Joint Capabilities Integration and 
Development System (JCIDS); Manual for the Operations of the Joint Capabilities Integration 
and Development System; and Air Force Manual (AFMAN) 33-363, Management of Records. 
This publication applies to individuals at all levels who prepare, manage, review, certify, 
approve, disseminate and/or use official Air Force architectures and interoperability assessments, 
including the Air Force Reserve (AFR) and Air National Guard (ANG), except where noted 
otherwise. 
The authorities to waive wing/unit level requirements in this publication are identified with a 
Tier (“T-0, T-1, T-2, T-3”) number following the compliance statement. See AFI 33-360, 
Publications and Forms Management, for a description of the authorities associated with the Tier 
numbers. Submit requests for waivers through the chain of command to the appropriate Tier 
2 
AFI17-140  29 JUNE 2018 
waiver approval authority, or alternately, to the requestor’s commander for non-tiered 
compliance items. 
Ensure that all records created as a result of processes prescribed in this publication are 
maintained in accordance with AFMAN 33-363, Management of Records, and disposed of in 
accordance with Air Force Records Disposition Schedule in the Air Force Records Information 
Management System (AFRIMS).  Refer recommended changes and questions about this 
publication to the Office of Primary Responsibility (OPR) using the AF Form 847, 
Recommendation for Change of Publication; route AF Forms 847 from the field through the 
appropriate functional chain of command.  This publication may be supplemented at any level, 
but all Supplements must be routed to the OPR of this publication for coordination prior to 
certification and approval. 
SUMMARY OF CHANGES 
This document has been substantially revised and needs to be completely reviewed.  This 
instruction supersedes AFI 33-401, Air Force Architecting. This instruction incorporates 
interoperability guidance contained in expired Air Force Guidance Memorandum (AFGM) 2015-
33-03. This publication establishes policy and assigns roles and responsibilities for developing, 
maintaining, storing, and implementing sound integrated and interoperable architectures across 
the Air Force for Information Technology (IT) and National Security System (NSS) across the 
four DoD mission areas to support decision-making processes and ensure the alignment of Air 
Force’s IT and NSS environment with the critical mission needs of the Air Force.  It redefines 
the Air Force Enterprise Architecture (AFEA) framework and removes architecture approval and 
certification guidance and removes the Terms of Reference for the Architecture Executive 
Committee and Architecture Development Working Group. 
 
Chapter 1— ENTERPRISE ARCHITECTURE 
 
4 
1.1. 
 Overview. ................................................................................................................  
4 
Figure 1.1. 
 Levels of Architecture. (Federal Enterprise Architecture Practice Guidance, 
2007). .......................................................................................................................  
4 
1.2. 
 Air Force Enterprise Architecture ...........................................................................  
5 
Figure 1.2. 
 Air Force Enterprise Architecture Framework. ......................................................  
7 
Chapter 2— ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES 
 
8 
2.1. 
 Secretary of the Air Force, Office of Information Dominance and Chief 
Information Officer (SAF/CIO A6) .........................................................................  
8 
2.2. 
 Air Force Chief Data Officer (AF/CO). ..................................................................  
9 
2.3. 
 Air Force Chief Architect.    ...................................................................................  
9 
2.4. 
 Mission Area Owners, HAF/SAF Functionals, AFR, ANG, MAJCOMs.   ...........  
11 
AFI17-140  29 JUNE 2018 
3 
2.5. 
 Chief Data Officer for Mission Area, HAF/SAF Functional, AFR, ANG, or 
MAJCOM. ...............................................................................................................  
11 
2.6. 
 Chief Architect for Mission Area, HAF/SAF Functional, AFR, ANG, or 
MAJCOM.   .............................................................................................................  
11 
2.7. 
 Solution Architecture Steward. ...............................................................................  
12 
2.8. 
 Architect.  ...............................................................................................................  
13 
2.9. 
 Architecture Consumer.   ........................................................................................  
13 
2.10. 
 Air Force Interoperability Certification Manager. ..................................................  
13 
2.11. 
 Air Force Representative to the DoD Interoperability Steering Group.  ................  
14 
2.12. 
 Program Managers. .................................................................................................  
14 
Chapter 3— ENTERPRISE ARCHITECTURE PRACTICE 
 
16 
3.1. 
 Use of Architectures.   ............................................................................................  
16 
3.2. 
 Architecture Development. .....................................................................................  
17 
Chapter 4— INTEROPERABILITY AND SUPPORTABILITY 
 
20 
4.1. 
 Interoperability. .......................................................................................................  
20 
4.2. 
 Interoperability Assessments. .................................................................................  
20 
4.3. 
 Supportability. .........................................................................................................  
25 
Attachment 1— GLOSSARY OF REFERENCES AND SUPPORTING INFORMATION 
 
28 
 
 
 
4 
AFI17-140  29 JUNE 2018 
Chapter 1 
ENTERPRISE ARCHITECTURE 
1.1.  Overview.  Enterprise Architecture (EA) is a conceptual blueprint that defines the structure 
and operations of an organization. An organization uses EA to determine how to most effectively 
achieve its current and future objectives.  The Air Force and DoD use EA to support key 
processes for requirements, acquisition, systems engineering, programming and budgeting of 
funds, interoperability, and portfolio management.  EA includes a baseline (as-is) architecture, a 
target (to-be) architecture, and a sequencing plan for transitioning between the two. 
1.1.1.  Levels of Architectures  . Depending on their purpose, architectures have different 
perspectives and varying amounts of information.  As shown in Figure 1.1, enterprise-level, 
segment-level, and solution-level architectures provide different points of view by varying 
the level of detail and addressing related but distinct concerns. 
Figure 1.1.  Levels of Architecture. (Federal Enterprise Architecture Practice Guidance, 
2007). 
 
1.1.1.1.  Enterprise-level architecture  . Driven by an organization’s strategy, 
enterprise-level architecture helps an organization identify whether its resources are 
properly aligned to its mission, strategic goals, and objectives.  Enterprise-level 
architectures have a baseline (as-is) architecture, a target (to-be) architecture, and a 
transition strategy for the organization. 
1.1.1.2.  Segment-level architecture  . Segment-level architecture describes individual 
elements of the enterprise, such as core missions, common or shared business services, 
and enterprise services.  Segment-level architecture has a baseline (as-is), as well as a 
target (to-be) and a transition strategy for a portion of the enterprise.  There are multiple 
segments within an enterprise architecture. 
 
 
AFI17-140  29 JUNE 2018 
5 
1.1.1.3.  Solution-level architecture  . Solution-level architecture is the most detailed 
level of architecture and portrays the relationships among elements to answer a problem.  
Solution architecture is the most common level of architecture developed.  Solution-level 
architecture aligns to segment-level and enterprise-level architectures. 
1.1.2.  Inputs to Architecture  .  There are inputs to architectures that significantly impact 
their development and use as well as their ability to integrate with other architectures.  These 
inputs can exist at any level of architecture and serve to guide and constrain architectures. 
1.1.2.1.  Reference Architecture  . Reference Architecture is defined as an authoritative 
source of information about a specific subject area that guides and constrains 
architectures and solutions by providing common information, guidance, reusable 
components, and direction about the subject area.  Reference architectures use this 
presentation of common information and components to provide a pattern for solving 
similar problems across multiple domains, which drives efficiency and interoperability.  
Reference architectures can exist at any architecture level and come from sources 
external and internal to the Air Force.  For example, the Department of Defense Chief 
Information Officer (DoD CIO) developed a Cybersecurity Reference Architecture to 
convey the technical direction to guide and constrain cybersecurity solution architectures 
to meet DoD Information Enterprise cybersecurity goals.  The Air Force has the Base 
Area Network Functional Specification which provides minimum functional standards to 
Major Commands (MAJCOM) that are deploying technologies throughout the Air Force. 
1.1.2.2.  Mission threads  . Mission threads are a description of the end-to-end set of 
activities and systems that accomplish the execution of a specific mission and represent a 
horizontal segment of architecture.  The resulting thread has a mission thread owner who 
works with architects to describe a capability by combining tasks, conditions, standards, 
and ways and means to create a desired effect.  Mission threads draw from doctrine, 
training, and readiness manuals, and other authoritative capability-related data sources.  
Mission threads reduce interoperability risk by highlighting critical interfaces seen when 
solutions are placed into a real world context.  This includes the cyber aspect of mission 
threads as IT evolves. 
1.2.  Air Force Enterprise Architecture  . 
1.2.1.  Definition  . The Air Force Enterprise Architecture (AFEA) is the collection of 
architecture data from strategic guidance and Air Force segment and solution architectures.  
It describes the people, processes, data, technology, and information used in the current state 
of Air Force investments and capabilities as well as future state and transition plans. 
1.2.2.  Scope  . The AFEA applies to IT and NSS in the warfighting, business, intelligence, 
and information environment mission areas. 
1.2.3.  Purpose  .  The purpose of the AFEA is to enhance interoperability, mission 
effectiveness, security and cybersecurity, and financial efficiencies and to shape future 
technology transitions through guided investment portfolio strategies and decisions based on 
joint capability and interoperability requirements and defined standards. 
1.2.4.  Objectives  . 
 
6 
AFI17-140  29 JUNE 2018 
 
1.2.4.1.  The AFEA provides information on the Air Force core functions and missions 
and their interdependencies that supports Senior Leader decision-making to improve 
interoperability internally and externally to the Air Force. 
1.2.4.2.  The AFEA provides enterprise-wide visibility of people, processes, data, 
technology, and information. 
1.2.4.3.  The Air Force mission areas of the AFEA align to corresponding DoD mission 
area architectures helping to show the alignment of investments to portfolios. 
1.2.4.4.  The AFEA supports analysis to identify redundancies, dependencies, and gaps in 
capabilities across the Air Force. 
1.2.4.5.  The AFEA guides, informs, and constrains segment and solution architectures. 
1.2.4.6.  The AFEA integrated dictionary provides a standard lexicon for the architecture 
data. 
1.2.5.  Air Force Enterprise Architecture Framework  . Figure 1.2 is a diagram showing 
the AFEA framework. Starting at the bottom of Figure 1.2, solution-level architectures fit 
into sub-portfolios which align to mission areas that are supported by the Service Core 
Functions.  Segment-level architectures can exist from the sub-portfolios through the mission 
areas.  The Air Force enterprise-level architecture is based on strategic guidance and the 
collection of architecture data from the mission area architectures.  The mission area 
architectures align to the AFEA and DoD-level architectures.  Reference architectures can 
exist at any level to guide and constrain enterprise-level, segment-level, and solution-level 
architectures. 
AFI17-140  29 JUNE 2018 
7 
Figure 1.2.  Air Force Enterprise Architecture Framework. 
 
1.2.6.  Architecture Data Integration  .  Analysis and reporting is possible through the 
vertical and horizontal integration of architecture data.  Vertical data integration begins by 
combining detailed solution architectures within a sub-portfolio, then the sub-portfolios are 
combined within a portfolio, and finally the portfolios are combined to provide the full 
breadth and depth of information in the AFEA. Horizontal integration is done through the 
analysis of mission threads (paragraph  1.1.2.2.). 
1.2.6.1.  Analysis  . By having business and operational processes and the information 
assets that support them, it is possible to see how the Air Force is meeting the goals and 
objectives defined in the Air Force Strategic Master Plan. 
1.2.6.2.  Portfolio Assignment  . Upon registration in Information Technology 
Investment Portfolio Suite (ITIPS), solutions architectures are assigned to a portfolio/sub-
portfolio in the AFEA framework. 
1.2.6.3.  Architecture Data Repositories  .  Architecture data repositories are used to 
collect and integrate architecture data making analysis across many architectures 
possible. 
 
 
8 
AFI17-140  29 JUNE 2018 
Chapter 2 
ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES 
2.1.  Secretary of the Air Force, Office of Information Dominance and Chief Information 
Officer (SAF/CIO A6)  .  In addition to duties in HAF MD 1-26, the SAF/CIO A6: 
2.1.1.  Appoints the Air Force Chief Architect. 
2.1.2.  Directs the Air Force Chief Architect to establish an office to develop the Air Force 
Enterprise Architecture (AFEA) and Air Force architecting policy. 
2.1.3.  Maintains a list of all Air Force IT systems in ITIPS. 
2.1.4.  Oversees the development, use, and maintenance of Air Force architectures 
(enterprise, segment, solution, and reference). 
2.1.5.  Advises the Air Force Chief of Staff on options and solutions to identified 
interoperability issues. 
2.1.6.  Uses approved architecture data and architecture data analysis to support decision-
making and DoD efforts for example but not limited to the Federal Data Center 
Consolidation Initiative and the Joint Information Environment. 
2.1.7.  Develops guidance to require and demonstrate that Air Force Information Technology 
(IT) is interoperable and supportable with other relevant IT, internal and external to the Air 
Force. 
2.1.8.  Oversees the implementation of processes for the development, review, and approval 
of Air Force Information Support Plans. 
2.1.9.  Oversees the implementation of processes for the development and certification of the 
Net-Ready Key Performance Parameter for Air Force IT. 
2.1.10.  Oversees the implementation of processes for the interoperability test, evaluation, 
and certification of IT before connection to a DoD network. 
2.1.11.  Participates in other DoD Components’ Information Support Plan (ISP) reviews. 
2.1.12.  Coordinates on Net-Ready Key Performance Parameter (NR KPP) on IT and 
National Security System (NSS) with joint, multinational, or interagency requirements prior 
to the Air Force Requirements Oversight Council and, when Air Force is the sponsor, prior to 
Joint Requirements Oversight Council. 
2.1.13.  Establishes procedures consistent with DoDI 8330.01 for interoperability 
certification or recertification for IT that does not have joint, multinational, interagency 
interoperability requirements. 
2.1.14.  Designates an Air Force Interoperability Certification Manager as approval authority 
for all Air Force IT with no joint, multinational, or interagency interoperability requirements 
and not governed by DoDI 8100.04, DoD Unified Capabilities, as described in Enclosure 3 
of DoDI 8330.01. 
2.1.15.  Designates an Air Force representative to take part in and support the DoD 
Interoperability Steering Group. 
AFI17-140  29 JUNE 2018 
9 
2.1.16.  Designs, develops, tests, evaluates, and incorporates IT interoperability into all Air 
Force IT. (T-0). 
2.1.16.1.  Requires that interoperability requirements are coordinated with the Chairman 
of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Combatant Commanders, and that each IT system 
design identifies all external IT interfaces with required joint, multinational, interagency, 
and other non-DoD systems. (T-0). 
2.1.16.2.  Recommends tradeoffs among operational effectiveness, operational suitability, 
cybersecurity (formerly information assurance), survivability, and IT interoperability to 
the USD (AT&L), the DoD CIO, and the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. (T-0). 
2.1.16.3.  Requires IT programs be adequately funded to carry out the interoperability 
functions specified in DoDI 8330.01 and this guidance. (T-0). 
2.1.17.  Coordinates with Director, National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency on all geospatial 
intelligence-related requirements, ISPs, test strategies and plans, test and evaluation results, 
and interoperability certifications. 
2.1.18.  Coordinates with SAF/AQ to include technology and program protection 
requirements in architecting policies and processes to minimize the risk that DoD’s 
warfighting mission capability could be impaired due to vulnerabilities in system design and 
architecture. 
2.1.19.  Coordinates with Deputy Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Surveillance and 
Reconnaissance (AF/A2) on all intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance and 
intelligence-related requirements, Program Protections Plans (PPP), ISPs, test and evaluation 
strategies/plans/results, and interoperability certifications. 
2.2.  Air Force Chief Data Officer (AF/CO). 
2.2.1.  Collaborates with the Air Force Chief Architect to define, guide, inform, and constrain 
the Air Force Data Architecture. 
2.2.2.  Establishes the scope, standards, and methodology for publication into the Air Force 
Enterprise Information Model. 
2.2.3.  Participates in Enterprise Architecture (EA) governance bodies. 
2.3.  Air Force Chief Architect.    There is one Air Force Chief Architect who reports to the 
SAF/CIO A6. 
2.3.1.  Responsible for the AFEA. 
2.3.2.  Provides the status of the AFEA to the SAF/CIO A6. 
2.3.3.  Reviews the AFEA with the SAF/CIO A6 at least annually. 
2.3.4.  Participates in Federal, DoD, and Headquarters Air Force architecture governance 
bodies. 
2.3.5.  Establishes governance to oversee the development, assessment, alignment, 
adjudication, approval, compliance, maintenance, configuration management, change 
management, and application of the AFEA. 
10 
AFI17-140  29 JUNE 2018 
2.3.6.  Maintains a list of Chief Architects appointed by Mission Area Owners, HAF/SAF 
Functionals, Air Force Reserve (AFR), Air National Guard (ANG), and Major Commands 
(MAJCOM). 
2.3.7.  Sets Air Force EA standards in line with DoD guidance and industry best practices. 
(T-0). 
2.3.8.  Defines architecture configuration management standards for the AFEA, and uses 
consensus standards in lieu of government specifications and standards, unless inconsistent 
with law or otherwise impractical. 
2.3.9.  Provides policy and guidance for architecture development including defining 
architecture data requirements and criteria. 
2.3.10.  Updates architecture development policy and guidance to address topics such as 
operational technology, agile software development, and rapid prototyping. 
2.3.11.  Provides oversight, analysis, and policy guidance to ensure compliance with 
mandated standards for developing, maintaining, and implementing sound integrated and 
interoperable architectures across the Air Force. 
2.3.12.  Establishes criteria for architecture compliance with Federal laws, and DoD, Joint 
Staff and Air Force policies and procedures. 
2.3.13.  Ensures all architectural views submitted as part of the AFEA or for interoperability 
assessments comply with the latest version of Department of Defense Architecture 
Framework (DoDAF). (T-0). 
2.3.14.  Develops and maintains the enterprise-level architecture portion of the AFEA. 
2.3.15.  Defines, develops, and maintains a common lexicon to assist with standardizing 
terms. 
2.3.16.  Provides a library of reference architectures and instructions on how they should be 
used to the Chief Architects. 
2.3.17.  Identifies enterprise-wide standards, services, and approaches for use in architecture 
development. 
2.3.18.  Captures and maintains strategic alignment of the AFEA to Air Force strategy and 
higher level (DoD/Joint Staff) requirements, to include goals and objectives defined in the 
Air Force Strategic Master Plan, Core Support Plans, and Flight Plans. 
2.3.19.  Ensures the AFEA aligns to DoD Mission Area architectures. 
2.3.20.  Oversees the maturation of the EA programs across the Air Force based on the 
General Accountability Office's (GAO) Enterprise Architecture Management Maturity 
Framework (EAMMF). 
2.3.21.  Establishes, operates and maintains the AFEA repository. 
2.3.22.  Organizes and coordinates architecture integration activities both internal and 
external to the Air Force enterprise. 
2.3.23.  Defines job skills requirements for Enterprise Architects. 
2.3.24.  Defines architecture education and training requirements. 
AFI17-140  29 JUNE 2018 
11 
2.3.25.  Defines standard statement(s) for inclusion in requirements documents related to 
contracting for architecture services. 
2.4.  Mission Area Owners, HAF/SAF Functionals, AFR, ANG, MAJCOMs.   
2.4.1.  Collaborates with the Air Force Chief Architect to establish and maintain architecture 
policy, representing the needs of decision makers. 
2.4.2.  Plans architecting and interoperability for their area of responsibility and provides 
financial, manpower, and other resources to fulfill requirements. 
2.4.3.  Appoints a Chief Architect in writing and forwards a copy to the Air Force Chief 
Architect.  As needed, appoints a Lead Architect to support the Chief Architect. 
2.4.4.  Approves architectures under their purview. 
2.4.5.  Uses approved architecture data and architecture data analysis to support decision-
making. 
2.4.6.  Ensures subordinate organizations and Communities of Interest adhere to architecture 
standards and processes. 
2.4.7.  Provides Air Force representation, as required, on DoD IT Standards Registry (DISR) 
technical working groups for review and disposition of technical standards in support of 
SAF/CIO A6 and the command assigned the network management role. 
2.4.8.  Includes the Cyberspace Core Function Lead, in Architecture Review processes as the 
stakeholder for capacity and supportability on Air Force networks. 
2.5.  Chief Data Officer for Mission Area, HAF/SAF Functional, AFR, ANG, or MAJCOM. 
2.5.1.  Collaborates with the peer Chief Architect in the development of the data architecture 
for segment and solution architectures. 
2.5.2.  Ensures all information assets follow the Air Force Enterprise Information Model 
standards. 
2.5.3.  Facilitates identification of authoritative data for each information asset within their 
area of responsibility. 
2.5.4.  Assesses data health of information assets within their area of responsibility. 
2.5.5.  Mission Area Chief Data Officers collaborate with HAF/SAF Functional, AFR, ANG, 
and MAJCOM Chief Data Officers to identify data architecture efficiencies across the 
mission area. 
2.5.6.  HAF/SAF Functional Chief Data Officers identify and assign data stewards for each 
information asset within their area of responsibility in collaboration with Process Owners and 
AFR, ANG, and MAJCOM Chief Data Officers. 
2.6.  Chief Architect for Mission Area, HAF/SAF Functional, AFR, ANG, or 
MAJCOM.    Each organization appoints a Chief Architect who interacts with the Air Force 
Chief Architect. 
2.6.1.  Interacts with the Air Force Chief Architect on matters related to the AFEA. 
2.6.2.  Manages the segment-level and solution-level architectures under their purview. 
12 
AFI17-140  29 JUNE 2018 
2.6.3.  Captures and maintains strategic alignment of the segment-level and solution-level 
architecture to any applicable strategic guidance. 
2.6.4.  Aligns architectures to the segment-level, enterprise-level, or DoD architecture above 
them. 
2.6.5.  Defines architecture requirements and policy specific to their area of responsibility to 
include an architecture approval process. 
2.6.6.  Determines which architectures under their purview are required to support DoD and 
Air Force capabilities and processes and designates them as relevant to the AFEA. 
2.6.7.  Ensures that AFEA-related architectures conform to DoDAF. 
2.6.8.  Ensures the vertical and horizontal integration of AFEA-related architectures within 
their area. 
2.6.9.  Collaborates with other Chief Architects on the horizontal integration of AFEA-
related architectures. 
2.6.10.  Coordinates and collaborates with other Chief Architects when an AFEA-related 
architecture spans multiple Service Core Functions (SCF) or portfolios by designating one of 
the Chief Architects with primary responsibility.  If an agreement cannot be reached, the 
Chief Architects will raise the issue to the first Chief Architect that is in both their chains of 
command.  If the issue cannot be resolved, it will continue up the chain of command 
ultimately to the Air Force Chief Architect to resolve. 
2.6.11.  Ensures architectures that are part of the AFEA are complete as a part of the review 
process. 
2.6.12.  Reviews and recommends approval of AFEA-related architectures for their 
respective organization after coordinating with applicable Chief Architects. 
2.6.13.  Enforces the use of enterprise-wide standards, services, and approaches whenever 
possible in the architectures. 
2.6.14.  Publishes approved architectures to an architecture data repository. 
2.6.15.  Defines architecture training and certification requirements for their architects. 
2.6.16.  Ensures architects are trained. 
2.6.17.  Participates in architecture governance bodies. 
2.6.18.  Applies architecture configuration management standards and processes. 
2.6.19.  Appropriately marks architectures with Classification and Distribution Statements. 
2.6.20.  Participates in architecture review processes in which they are a stakeholder (e.g. 
information exchange, network supportability, compliance issues). 
2.7.  Solution Architecture Steward.  The Solution Architecture Steward represents the needs 
of a stakeholder community and is the primary source of information needed for solution-level 
architecture development.  A Solution Architecture Steward participates throughout the solution 
architecture development and validates the architecture at the end of the architecture 
development process.  Program Managers and Requirements Leads are examples of Solution 
Architecture Stewards.  Solution Architecture Steward: 
AFI17-140  29 JUNE 2018 
13 
2.7.1.  States the requirements for an architecture development effort and provides applicable 
documentation such as laws, regulations, and policies. 
2.7.2.  Identifies Subject Matter Experts (SME) and allocates time for identified SMEs to 
collaborate regarding the creation and validation of the architecture. 
2.7.3.  Conducts a thorough functional review of the architecture to validate the architecture 
meets the purpose for which it was built. 
2.7.4.  Signs a validation letter stating that the solution architecture meets the intended 
purpose. 
2.7.5.  Informs their Chief Architect that the architecture has been validated. 
2.8.  Architect.   
2.8.1.  Analyzes, defines, builds, maintains, and improves an architecture for a stated 
purpose. 
2.8.2.  Supports decision makers with architecture data and analysis. 
2.8.3.  Assists consumers and other architects with understanding the subject architecture to 
ensure an accurate reflection of interdependent capabilities and requirements for related 
architectures. 
2.8.4.  Uses enterprise-wide standards, services, and approaches whenever possible in the 
architecture. 
2.8.5.  Follows a documented change management process. 
2.8.6.  Stays current in tools, methods, and frameworks and maintains all required 
certifications (as applicable). 
2.8.7.  Submits architectures to the appropriate approval authority as required. 
2.9.  Architecture Consumer.    An architecture consumer is a person who uses an architecture 
or the results of architecture analysis to gain information about the architecture’s subject.  Within 
a project team, an architecture consumer may be the project manager or the requirements 
manager.  Portfolio Managers or cybersecurity assessors are also examples of architecture 
consumers. 
2.9.1.  Employs architecture and architecture analysis to support decision-making within their 
area of responsibility. 
2.9.2.  Uses architecture to reduce the complexity of the problem and understand the 
relationships identified with the architecture. 
2.9.3.  Uses architecture to identify gaps. 
2.9.4.  Uses architecture to find potential redundancies. 
2.9.5.  Uses architecture to understand resource allocation. 
2.10.  Air Force Interoperability Certification Manager. 
2.10.1.  Oversees development, review, and approval of Air Force ISPs which applies to IT 
that is not joint, multinational, or interagency. (T-0). 
14 
AFI17-140  29 JUNE 2018 
2.10.2.  Reviews and approves requests to waive the requirement for interoperability testing 
of Air Force-unique systems. (T-0). Upon approval, provides the DoD CIO with copies of 
the waiver request and approval memorandum. If the waiver request is disapproved, the ISP 
and joint interoperability testing must occur. (T-0). 
2.11.  Air Force Representative to the DoD Interoperability Steering Group.  
2.11.1.  Serves as the Air Force interface to DoD CIO, Joint Staff, Program Managers, 
Program Sponsors and the Joint Interoperability Test Command (JITC) on coordination of 
interoperability issues among the DoD Components, and between DoD and other Federal 
level agencies/activities, and allied/coalition partners, as required.  See DoDI 8330.01 for 
more information about the DoD Interoperability Steering Group. 
2.11.2.  Coordinates with JITC for interoperability certification testing. (T-0). 
2.11.3.  Assists Program Managers with preparing an Interim Certificate to Operate (ICTO) 
request for consideration by the Interoperability Steering Group when all the requisite actions 
(ISP approval, NR KPP certification, JITC coordination) have not been completed. 
2.11.4.  Reviews, endorses, and submits ICTO requests to the Interoperability Steering 
Group.  Returns unendorsed ICTO requests to Program Managers for further development. 
2.11.5.  Tracks IT and NSS.  IT or NSS with significant interoperability deficiencies, or not 
making significant progress toward achieving Joint Interoperability Test Certification, are 
placed on the Operating at Risk List. (T-0). The Operating at Risk List contains all IT 
systems denied an ICTO and that have not received a waiver. The Operating at Risk List is 
maintained by the Defense Information Systems Agency (DISA). 
2.12.  Program Managers. 
2.12.1.  Incorporate funding requirements, manpower and associated resources into program 
planning to ensure architecture, interoperability, and supportability requirements are 
completed and approved in sufficient time to meet milestone dates. 
2.12.2.  Incorporate funding requirements, manpower and associated resources into program 
planning to ensure interoperability testing requirements are budgeted and approved in 
sufficient time to meet milestone dates. 
2.12.3.  Coordinate with the Air Force Representative to the DoD Interoperability Steering 
Group and with JITC for interoperability certification tests conducted by the JITC. 
2.12.4.  Designate a Chief Developmental Tester or Test Manager (for non-oversight 
programs) to oversee the execution of test requirements, per AFI 63-101/20-101 and AFI 99-
103. 
2.12.5.  Develop an ISP for all IT and NSS for programs governed by DoDI 5000.02 that 
exchange data, unless waived by the SAF/CIO A6 Interoperability Certification Manager. 
For programs governed by DoDI 5000.75, provide ISP-type information in the design 
specification for all IT that exchange data. 
2.12.6.  Register Air Force IT in ITIPS which will generate an ITIPS number.  Registration in 
ITIPS automatically generates a DoD IT Portfolio Repository (DITPR) number for certain 
records. Either the ITIPS number or DITPR number must be documented on the ISP. 
AFI17-140  29 JUNE 2018 
15 
2.12.7.  Ensure that risk-reducing countermeasures for security-related threats are identified 
and recorded in the program’s Program Protection Plan (PPP).  Per AFI 63-101/20-101, 
Integrated Life Cycle Management, include the approved PPP as supporting document in the 
attachment section of the ISP. 
2.12.8.  Describe IT/NSS dependencies and interface requirements in sufficient detail to 
enable supportability requirements planning, test planning, and for verification of the NR 
KPP. 
2.12.9.  Contact ACC/A5JI for Air Force systems using Tactical Data Links (TDL) to 
schedule an Air Force System Interoperability Test to obtain their TDL military standard 
(MIL-STD) compliance certification. 
 
 
16 
AFI17-140  29 JUNE 2018 
Chapter 3 
ENTERPRISE ARCHITECTURE PRACTICE 
3.1.  Use of Architectures.    The information and relationships contained in the Air Force 
Enterprise Architecture (AFEA) provides visibility that will be used to support the following 
decision-making processes. 
3.1.1.  Transformations.  Whether it is migrating a system to the cloud or revamping an 
entire capability area, architecture data supports transformation through the use of defined, 
consistent, related, structured data that is applied to the current state, the future state, and 
transition plan. 
3.1.2.  Business Process Reengineering  .  Architectures document processes, which are 
analyzed by the organization’s management office for improvements such as faster delivery 
and reduced costs. 
3.1.3.  Rationalization/Identification of Redundancies  .  Through the consistent capture of 
data, capabilities, systems, and applications, information can be compared allowing for the 
identification of potential redundancies that can be analyzed for rationalization. 
3.1.4.  Capability Requirements  . Architectures are used to support AFI 10-601, 
Operational 
Capability 
Requirements 
Development, 
and 
AF/A5R 
Requirements 
Development Guidebook, Volumes 1-4, to validate and prioritize all Air Force capability 
requirements.   Architecture is also used for capability risk analysis by identifying capability 
relationships and program interdependencies that could cause risk to other organizations and 
programs if unfilled or delayed. 
3.1.5.  Portfolio Management and IT Investment Review  .  Architecture data supports 
AFI 17-110, IT Portfolio Management and Capital Planning and Investment Control, 
through the analysis of architecture data by portfolios and showing the relationships between 
portfolio objectives and DoD/Air Force enterprise vision, mission, goals.  Architectures also 
support portfolio management by showing performance measures and identifying capability 
gaps, opportunities, and redundancies.  Additionally, an investment’s solution architecture 
must be compliant with DoD and Air Force guidance to support operational and technical 
testing of IT systems. (T-1). 
3.1.6.  Clinger-Cohen Act (CCA) Compliance  .  The Clinger-Cohen Act’s purpose is to 
ensure that an IT investment supports the agency’s mission.  AFMAN 17-1402, Air Force 
Clinger-Cohen Act Compliance Guide, defines the CCA compliance and reporting process.  
There are eleven CCA compliance elements, two of which are related to architectures.  CCA 
Compliant Element 8 deals with showing how the investment is consistent with DoD 
Information Enterprise policies and architecture, to include standards.  CCA Compliance 
Element 9 focuses on ensuring a program has a Cybersecurity Strategy that is consistent with 
DoD policies, standards, and architectures.  Refer to AFMAN 17-1402, Architecture 
Assessment Checklist for CCA Compliance, for specific architecture requirements. 
 
 
AFI17-140  29 JUNE 2018 
17 
3.1.7.  Risk Management  .  Architecture supports AFI 17-101, Risk Management 
Framework (RMF) for Air Force IT, which outlines the security architecture using technical 
standards, protocols, technology, and guidance to establish consistent, secure environments 
needed for IT deployment. 
3.1.8.  Acquisition  .  Architecture supports DoDI 5000.02, DoDI 5000.75, and AFI 63-
101/20-101 by using DoDAF to present architecture data in a consistent manner to support 
program documentation at decision points within the acquisition process. 
3.1.9.  System Engineering  .  Architecture supports implementation of AFI 63-101/20-101, 
Chapter 5, Systems Engineering. Enterprise Architecture (EA), with authoritative data, is 
essential to make informed systems engineering decisions throughout the Acquisition and 
Sustainment Life Cycle. EA supports a digital engineering approach, data-driven design 
reviews, and model-based systems engineering processes and methodologies.  These 
processes and methodologies enable analysis and decision-making to explicitly consider cost 
and capability tradeoffs not just of the weapon/business system design, but also of the 
systems of systems (SoS) architecture and potential family of future upgrades and variants. 
Systems Engineers should consider use of architecture, modeling, and analytical tools for all 
steps of the Systems Engineering Process. 
3.1.10.  Test and Evaluation  .  Architecture data includes detailed information about 
interfaces that are critical to testing and evaluation in support of AFI 99-103, Capabilities-
Based Test and Evaluation. 
3.1.11.  Interoperability  . Air Force IT must be able to exchange and use data and 
information, to the maximum extent practical, with existing and planned systems and IT 
services within the Air Force as well as across component, joint, combined, and coalition 
forces, other US Government departments and agencies, and non-governmental 
organizations. (T-0). Architecture data is used to describe the information exchanges, 
describe characteristics of the data being exchanged, and the operational processes that the 
exchanges support. 
3.2.  Architecture Development. 
3.2.1.  All architectures that are part of the Air Force Enterprise Architecture (AFEA) will 
use the latest version of the DoD Architecture Framework.  Information about DoDAF can 
be found at the public website, http://dodcio.defense.gov/Library/DoD-Architecture-
Framework/. (T-0). 
3.2.2.  For AFEA-related architectures, architecture will be data-driven. (T-1) 
3.2.3.  Architectures will be developed and implemented consistent with the following 
principles: 
3.2.3.1.  Air Force systems and services will be conceived, designed, operated and 
managed to address Air Force capability requirements. (T-1) 
3.2.3.2.  Air Force solutions will use enterprise-wide standards, services, and approaches 
to deliver seamless capabilities, help IT consolidations through reuse, and simplify the 
use of end-user functions. (T-1) 
3.2.3.3.  Air Force architecture data will be discoverable, accessible, understandable, 
linked, and trustworthy to all authorized users, including unanticipated users. (T-0). 
18 
AFI17-140  29 JUNE 2018 
3.2.3.4.  Air Force architecture data will be made understandable and consistent through 
the use of the AFEA lexicon and the use of authoritative data sources. (T-1) 
3.2.3.5.  Air Force systems and services will be made interoperable through the definition 
and enforcement of technology standards, interface profiles, and implementation 
guidance. (T-0) 
3.2.4.  Update architecture in accordance with the current version of DoDAF when there is a 
reason to change it.  (T-2). An architecture does not have to be updated solely to conform to 
the latest version of DoDAF. 
3.2.5.  Use architecture tools that are DoDAF Metamodel (DM2) compliant and able to 
exchange architecture data in standard formats, including but not limited to Extensible 
Markup Language. (T-2). 
3.2.6.  Use appropriate reference architectures to guide and constrain segment and solution 
architectures. (T-2). 
3.2.7.  Ensure architectures are traceable to higher level architectures; specifically, that 
solution architectures align to higher level segment and enterprise architectures. (T-2). 
3.2.8.  Ensure architectures can be traced to strategic guidance such as Flight Plans. (T-2). 
3.2.9.  Ensure architectures that are part of the AFEA are complete. (T-2) Complete means 
the required, minimum set of data elements needed for the AFEA to support strategic-level 
decision-making have been included in the architecture.  There will be no waivers issued for 
architectures that are not complete.  For older programs and capabilities that do not have an 
architecture, it will suffice to provide a Plan of Actions and Milestones which will provide a 
timeline of when the solution architecture will be developed.  Exception: Programs that will 
be retired within the Future Years Defense Program (FYDP) do not need to develop an 
architecture. 
3.2.10.  Post approved architectures to the relevant segment or enterprise architecture 
repository where they will be discoverable, accessible, reusable, shared, secure, 
interoperable, and understandable. (T-2). 
3.2.11.  Ensure architectures use validated cybersecurity solutions, products, and services 
when available and cost effective. (T-1) 
3.2.12.  Updates to an existing architecture will maintain the current cybersecurity posture of 
the system, including all of its program protection requirements. (T-1) 
3.2.13.  Architectures governed by DoDI 5000.02 will be allocated cybersecurity and related 
system security requirements and will be assessed for vulnerabilities. (T-0) 
3.2.13.1.  The architectures will address, at a minimum, how the solution: 
3.2.13.1.1.  Is structured to protect and preserve system functions or resources, e.g. 
through segmentation, separation, isolation, or partitioning. (T-0) 
3.2.13.1.2.  Monitors, detects, and responds to security anomalies. (T-0) 
 
 
AFI17-140  29 JUNE 2018 
19 
3.2.13.1.3.  Contributes to the development of Anti-Tamper architectures and 
technologies in coordination with the DoD Executive Agent for Anti-Tamper, based 
on the presence of Critical Program Information (CPI) in the solution and the 
consequence of CPI compromise as well as system exposure, per DoDD 5200.47E. 
(T-0) 
3.2.13.2.  Ensure architectures apply DoDI 8500.01 and DoDI 8510.01 in accordance 
with Air Force implementation and governance procedures. (T-0) 
3.2.14.  Ensure architectures use trusted suppliers or appropriate Supply Chain Risk 
Management (SCRM) countermeasures for system elements that perform mission-critical 
functions. Cyber protection measures for mission-critical functions (MCF) and critical 
components (CC) must, at a minimum, include software assurance (SwA), hardware 
assurance (HwA), procurement strategies, and anti-counterfeit practices in accordance with 
DoDI 5200.44, Protection of Mission Critical Functions to Achieve Trusted Systems & 
Networks (TSN). (T-0) 
 
 
20 
AFI17-140  29 JUNE 2018 
Chapter 4 
INTEROPERABILITY AND SUPPORTABILITY 
4.1.  Interoperability. 
4.1.1.  In accordance with DoDI 8330.01, Air Force IT must interoperate, to the maximum 
extent practicable, with existing and planned systems and IT services within the bounds of 
the Air Force as well as external organizations without compromising its existing 
cybersecurity posture and Critical Program Information. (T-0) External organizations are 
component, joint, combined, and coalition forces, other US Government departments and 
agencies, and non-governmental organizations. 
4.1.2.  Applicability. 
4.1.2.1.  Interoperability applies to IT (systems, applications, products, or IT services) 
that the Air Force acquires, procures, or operates, including IT that: 
4.1.2.1.1.  Supports all DoD mission areas. 
4.1.2.1.2.  Provides Air Force enterprise services. 
4.1.2.2.  Interoperability does not apply to IT that: 
4.1.2.2.1.  Only performs the functions of simulation or training and only stores, 
processes, or exchanges simulated data, and has no possibility of exporting data into 
an operational system. 
4.1.2.2.2.  Is used exclusively for demonstration or simulation, imports but does not 
export real-world data, and does not use that data to support any operational process 
or decision-making. 
4.1.3.  All Air Force IT and NSS must participate in and comply with interoperability risk 
assessments set forth in DoD or Air Force policy. (T-0). This is true for all mission areas, 
warfighter, business, intelligence and enterprise information environment. 
4.1.4.  Program Managers must use the interoperability tab in ITIPS to determine 
requirements for interoperability assessments, waiver eligibility, and other courses of action. 
(T-1). The tab includes explanatory guidance or policy references for each question. 
Answering questions in this tab is the first step toward determining interoperability 
certification actions. 
4.1.5.  All IT must have a NR KPP as part of its interoperability requirements documentation. 
(T-0). 
4.2.  Interoperability Assessments. 
4.2.1.  Information Support Plans (ISPs).  ISPs apply to programs governed by DoDI 
5000.02 and DoDI 8330.01. ISPs enable the Air Force and Joint communities to conduct 
IT/NSS supportability assessments. The ISP is technical document that provides Program 
Managers a means to identify and resolve potential information support implementation 
issues and risks that, if not properly managed, will limit or restrict the ability of a program to 
be operationally employed to support existing and future mission requirements. It is an 
authoritative document that directly informs the program’s Test and Evaluation Master Plan 
AFI17-140  29 JUNE 2018 
21 
with threshold and objective operations parameters, and it is a key vehicle that supports 
validation of a program’s eligibility for interoperability certification.  The ISP contains or 
includes a link to the NR KPP along with supporting architectural data. 
4.2.1.1.  The ISP identifies IT and information (including intelligence) needs, 
dependencies, and interfaces for programs in all acquisition categories, focusing on 
interoperability, information and system supportability, and information sufficiency 
concerns. 
4.2.1.2.  The ISP assesses the program’s path toward becoming Net-centric and describes 
the program’s Cybersecurity compliance, and addresses supportability topics like 
Intelligence, Bandwidth and Spectrum. 
4.2.1.3.  The ISP includes an operational employment concept; system interface 
descriptions; required information exchanges; and IT and NSS information support 
requirements derived from analysis of applicable Joint Operating Concepts, Joint 
Functional Concepts, Joint Integrating Concepts, and JCIDS documentation.  In addition, 
it includes the associated integrated architecture(s), potential issues or risks, and proposed 
solutions or risk mitigation plans. 
4.2.1.4.  Air Force organizations with equity in programs undergoing review will provide 
subject-matter expert (SME) support for assessment of ISPs via the Global Information 
Grid (GIG) Technical Guidance Federation (GTG-F) system. (T-0) 
4.2.1.5.  Requirements to Develop an ISP. 
4.2.1.5.1.  Acquisition  . An ISP is required for all IT or NSS acquisition category 
(ACAT) and non-ACAT programs that exchange data of any type to other systems 
(e.g. not a stand-alone system or application). For systems that will be part of a 
Family of Systems or System of Systems (FoS/SoS), an ISP is normally required. 
However, if the Milestone Decision Authority/Cognizant Fielding Authority for the 
FoS/SoS agree, an annex to the FoS/SoS ISP may be developed to meet the ISP 
requirement for the new system. If the FoS/SoS program does not have an ISP (i.e., a 
legacy fielded system not undergoing a major modification), then an ISP must be 
developed. (T-0). 
4.2.1.5.2.  Procurement  . An ISP is required for IT/NSS commercial-off-the-shelf or 
government-off-the-shelf (COTS/GOTS) procurements that exchange information of 
any type to other systems (e.g. not a stand-alone system or application). This is true 
even when the system being procured has been certified for use on the Air Force 
Network, unless a waiver is authorized. The level of detail in the ISP will be 
consistent with JCIDS requirements at each major milestone or decision point, and 
the technical and programmatic information available on the system. (T-0). 
4.2.1.5.3.  Fielded Systems – Major Modification  . Fielded systems that exchange 
information of any type to other systems (e.g. not a stand-alone system or application) 
that did not develop an ISP or a Command, Control, Communications, and 
Computers Intelligence Support Plan (C4ISP) during the acquisition phase are 
required to develop a system level ISP if they undergo a major modification/change. 
A major modification/change occurs when any of the following criteria are met (also 
for modifications that involve a new capability to exchange information): 
22 
AFI17-140  29 JUNE 2018 
4.2.1.5.3.1.  A NR KPP must be developed or modified as a result of the planned 
modification, per AFI 10-601, para 6.4. (T-1). 
4.2.1.5.3.2.  JCIDS documents are developed or modified as the result of the 
planned modification, per DoDI 8330.01. (T-0). 
4.2.1.5.3.3.  The modification exceeds 10% of ACAT II minimum thresholds, per 
AFI 10-601, Table 6.1. (T-1). 
4.2.1.5.3.4.  Fielded Systems – Interoperability Recertification. For those legacy 
systems that were not required to develop an ISP and must undergo a J-6 
Interoperability Recertification, a system-level ISP must be developed to support 
the recertification effort. (T-0). 
4.2.1.6.  ISP Submission Requirements. 
4.2.1.6.1.  Pre-Engineering and Manufacturing Development (Pre-EMD)  . DoDI 
5000.02 requires that Program Managers plan for and Milestone Decision Authorities 
conduct a Pre-Engineering and Manufacturing Development  Review before releasing 
the final Request for Proposal for the EMD Phase. Pre-EMD Review documents, 
which include the ISP, must be provided in final draft form prior to this review. (T-0). 
4.2.1.6.2.  Milestone B (MS B)  . MS B will be conducted according to the 
procedures outlined in DoDI 5000.02. Unless submitted and approved in support of 
the Pre-EMD Review, all remaining MS B information requirements (including any 
significant changes to documents following the Pre-EMD Review) will be satisfied 
prior to the milestone. (T-0). 
4.2.1.6.3.  Major Milestones and Decision Points (Milestone C, Critical Design 
Review, etc.)  . Per DoDI 5000.02, ISPs that were developed at MS B must be 
updated at each major decision point to reflect any changes in the requirements or 
design of the system since the initial ISP was developed. (T-0). 
4.2.1.6.4.  Fielded Systems – Major Modification  . When a fielded system 
undergoes a Major Modification, the existing ISP must be updated (see paragraph  
4.2.1.5.3 for what constitutes a major modification). (T-0). 
4.2.1.6.5.  Fielded Systems – Interoperability Recertification  . When a fielded 
system undergoes a periodic Joint Staff J6 Interoperability & Supportabilty (I&S) 
Recertification, the existing ISP must be updated.  The ISP must be evaluated for 
need of an update upon expiration of an existing I&S Certification. (T-0). 
4.2.1.7.  Additional ISP Guidance  . Air Force Instructions that require the development 
of ISPs include: AFI 10-601, AFI 63-101/20-101, and AFI 99-103. All Air Force 
organizations involved in the acquisition of IT or NSS are required to develop ISPs 
according to the above instructions. Specific guidance and instructions for ISP 
development, staffing and approval are provided in the Air Force Program Manager’s 
Guide for Developing and Processing Information Support Plans and Associated 
Interoperability Guidance, available on the restricted access Air Force Interoperability & 
ISP SharePoint site: https://cs2.eis.af.mil/sites/13157/default.aspx. 
 
 
AFI17-140  29 JUNE 2018 
23 
4.2.1.8.  ISP Exceptions  .  Air Force-unique interoperability policy may be waived 
using the procedures below. The waiver process will identify low risk systems connected 
to the Air Force’s network infrastructure and increase visibility of systems supporting the 
warfighter. These waivers do not apply to other requirements such as survivability or 
cybersecurity. Waivers are submitted to the Air Force Interoperability Certification 
Manager. 
4.2.1.8.1.  The ISP is not required for programs with functions of simulation or 
training and only stores, processes, or exchanged simulated data, and has no 
possibility of exporting data into an operational system.  ISPs are also not required for 
systems used exclusively for demonstration or simulation, imports but does not export 
real-world data, and does not use that data to support any operational process or 
decision making. 
4.2.1.8.2.  The ISP is not required for programs designated as DoD Unified 
Capabilities and governed by DoDI 8100.04. 
4.2.1.8.3.  An ISP waiver may be granted on a case-by-case basis for Air Force 
unique programs with Commercial Off-the-Shelf solutions that have minimal or 
manual data exchange requirements and for programs with system data that is not 
exchanged via the DoD Information Network. 
4.2.1.9.  Global Information Grid (GIG) Technical Guidance Federation (GTG-F) 
Tool. 
4.2.1.9.1.  The ISP will be developed within the GIG Technical Guidance Federation 
(GTG-F) using the Enhanced Information Support Plan (EISP) Enterprise Service 
Version template. (T-0).  The GTG-F is an integrated ISP development, staffing, 
analysis, approval and archiving environment used by DoD and Joint commands. The 
CAC-enabled GTG-F homepage is located at https://gtg.csd.disa.mil/. The GTG-F 
supports unclassified ISPs.  The Air Force Program Manager’s Guide for Developing 
and Processing Information Support Plans and Associated Interoperability Guidance 
describes an alternate process for classified ISPs. 
4.2.1.9.2.  ISPs are approved after formal assessment through the GTG-F review 
process. The formal review process must be repeated for each major decision point in 
the acquisition lifecycle. Additional reviews may be required when programs have 
unique reporting requirements based on interoperability concerns raised by assessor 
organizations to the Air Force Interoperability Certification Manager.  Specific 
guidance and instructions for ISP development, staffing and approval are provided in 
the Air Force Program Manager’s Guide for Developing and Processing Information 
Support Plans and Associated Interoperability Guidance, available on the Air Force 
restricted 
access 
Interoperability 
& 
ISP 
SharePoint 
site: 
https://cs2.eis.af.mil/sites/13157/default.aspx. 
4.2.2.  ISP-type Information Submission Requirements for Programs governed by DoDI 
5000.75  .  The DoDI 5000.75 removes the requirement to develop an ISP for business 
systems.  ISP-type information will be included in the design specifications. (T-0). AFMAN 
63-144, Defense Business System Life Cycle Management, provides Air Force specific 
guidance on implementation and oversight management of defense business systems. 
24 
AFI17-140  29 JUNE 2018 
4.2.3.  Net-Ready Key Performance Parameter (NR KPP). 
4.2.3.1.  Per DoDI 8330.01, all IT/NSS must have a NR KPP as part of its interoperability 
requirements documentation. (T-0). 
4.2.3.2.  The NR KPP identifies operational, net-centric requirements in terms of 
threshold and objective values for Measures of Effectiveness (MOE) and Measures of 
Performance (MOP). The NR KPP covers all communication, computing, and 
electromagnetic spectrum requirements involving information elements among producer, 
sender, receiver, and consumer. Information elements include the information, product, 
and service exchanges. These exchanges enable successful completion of the warfighter 
mission or joint business processes. 
4.2.3.3.  Refer to the “Content Guide for the Net-Ready KPP” found in Appendix E to 
Enclosure D  in the JCIDS Manual for additional information about the NR KPP. 
4.2.4.  Air Force Interoperability Certification Requirements. 
4.2.4.1.  For programs required to have Interoperability Certification, Interoperability & 
Supportability is an end-to-end process that concludes with the Interoperability 
Certification. Interoperability testing must be comprehensive, cost effective, and 
completed with interoperability certification granted, before fielding of a new IT 
capability or upgrade. (T-1). 
4.2.4.2.  For programs that require a Test and Evaluation Master Plan (TEMP), an 
interoperability Development Test Plan must be included in the TEMP and 
interoperability demonstrated by Milestone C/Acquisition Authority to Proceed to 
support interoperability certification during Initial Operational Test & Evaluation. (T-1). 
4.2.4.3.  To ensure the entrance criteria is met for the system to get into a Joint 
Interoperability Test, Program Managers must coordinate closely with the Joint 
Interoperability Test Command under DISA to review the NR KPPs and ensure test plan 
adequacy to verify the system meets NR KPP requirements, TEMPs (if applicable), test 
criteria, and associated developmental and operational test plans for interoperability. (T-
0). 
4.2.4.3.1.  For Air Force systems using Tactical Data Links (TDL), Program 
Managers must contact ACC/A5JI to schedule an Air Force System Interoperability 
Test to obtain their TDL military standard (MIL-STD) compliance certification. Once 
obtained, ACC/A5JI will nominate the system for entrance into a Joint 
Interoperability Test to obtain its joint interoperability certification. (T-1). 
4.2.4.3.2.  AF/A2 must ensure interoperability test, evaluation and certification of 
Intelligence Surveillance and Reconnaissance (ISR) NSS before connection to an 
Intelligence Community network. (T-1). 
4.2.4.3.3.  Joint Interoperability Test Command must ensure interoperability test, 
evaluation, and certification of IT before connection to a DoD network. (T-0). 
 
 
AFI17-140  29 JUNE 2018 
25 
4.3.  Supportability. 
4.3.1.  Intelligence Supportability  .  Intelligence integration in support of Air Force and 
joint systems development is essential in modernization processes in order to develop 
systems that work as advertised without scheduling delays, cost over-runs, and problems with 
supportability and interoperability. Ideally, intelligence integration should occur early in the 
acquisition process, preferably at the conceptual phase. 
4.3.1.1.  Intelligence Sensitivity  . The first step of this process is to determine whether 
or not the program/initiative is intelligence-sensitive. The customer should engage with 
their supporting intelligence representative to determine whether or not intelligence 
support is required. If the program/initiative is determined to be intelligence-sensitive, 
then an Intelligence Appendix to the ISP must be created. (T-1).  Refer to the Intelligence 
Appendix in the Air Force Program Manager’s Guide for Developing and Processing 
Information Support Plans and Associated Interoperability Guidance on the GTG-F site 
for further instruction. 
4.3.1.2.  Other Intelligence Considerations  . If intelligence support is required, follow 
the procedures in the Intelligence Chapter of the Defense Acquisition Guidebook. 
Additionally, the Life-Cycle Mission Data Plan should be used to define specific 
intelligence mission data requirements for a program. Intelligence mission data includes, 
but is not limited to the following functional areas: characteristics and performance, 
electronic warfare integrated reprogramming, order of battle, geospatial intelligence and 
signatures. Also, programs should follow the procedures in accordance with DoDD 
5250.01, Management of Intelligence Mission Data in DoD Acquisition. 
4.3.2.  Spectrum Supportability  . 
4.3.2.1.  Spectrum Supportability represents a nation’s indication of its intent to support, 
to the extent practical, sufficient electromagnetic spectrum necessary for the operation of 
a spectrum-dependent equipment or system during its expected life cycle. The equipment 
or system must be authorized to use spectrum that is, or will be, available from system 
development, through developmental and operational testing, to actual operation in the 
electromagnetic environment. The assessment of an equipment or system having 
“spectrum supportability” requires, at a minimum, receipt of equipment spectrum 
certification, reasonable assurance of the availability of sufficient frequencies for 
operation, and consideration of the electromagnetic compatibility. Positive spectrum 
supportability is not to be construed to be an authorization to transmit or a radio-
frequency assignment. 
4.3.2.2.  In accordance with DoDI 4650.01, Policy and Procedures for Management and 
Use of the Electromagnetic Spectrum, paragraph 4e, all spectrum dependent systems will 
determine if there will be sufficient spectrum to support operation of the system during its 
life cycle. (T-0). 
4.3.2.3.  Air Force spectrum dependent system developers/Program Managers will ensure 
that spectrum supportability requirements are addressed through: 
4.3.2.3.1.  Proper submission of a DD Form 1494, Application for Equipment 
Frequency Allocation, by the acquiring activity for spectrum certification activities 
and Host National Coordination. (T-1). 
26 
AFI17-140  29 JUNE 2018 
4.3.2.3.2.  Description of spectrum dependent system use, e.g. high-level operational 
concept graphic (OV-1), and other artifacts that show how systems or system-of-
systems will use the electromagnetic spectrum. Descriptions should also depict as 
applicable:  Air-to-Air, Air-Ground-Air, Air/Space, Ground-to-Ground. (T-1). 
4.3.2.3.3.  On-going reviews and assessments of relevant JCIDS documents and ISPs. 
(T-1). 
4.3.2.3.4.  Review of relevant NR KPPs ensuring spectrum is appropriately 
addressed. (T-1). 
4.3.2.3.5.  Initiation of the Spectrum Supportability Risk Assessment process, as 
required for each acquisition milestone decision action, i.e. Regulatory, Technical, 
Operational and E3 Risks which adversely impact operations. (T-1). 
4.3.2.4.  For help determining specific spectrum supportability issues, contact the Air 
Force Spectrum Management Office or MAJCOM spectrum management office. See AFI 
17-220, Spectrum Management, for spectrum requirements processing. Detailed 
procedures for processing spectrum supportability requirements in the ISP are available 
in the Air Force Program Manager’s Guide for Developing and Processing Information 
Support Plans and Associated Interoperability Guidance. 
4.3.3.  Bandwidth Supportability  . 
4.3.3.1.  The ISP review process assesses bandwidth requirements. These are external 
dependencies on the DoD communications architecture, to include line-of-sight wireless 
networks, 
datalinks, 
satellite 
communications, 
other 
beyond-line-of-sight 
communications, and wired/fiber networks. Through the ISP assessment process, the 
DoD CIO reviews program ISPs for section 1047(d) of the Duncan Hunter National 
Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2009 (Public Law 110-417) compliance. 
Section 1047(d) specifies, as part of the Milestone B approval process, that a review will 
be performed for major defense acquisition programs and major system acquisition 
programs to ensure the bandwidth requirements needed to support such programs are or 
will be met and how. (T-0). For defense business systems governed by DoDI 5000.75, 
the MS-B equivalent is the Acquisition Authority to Proceed (ATP). (T-0). 
4.3.3.2.  The Milestone C ISP submission will address bandwidth requirements in greater 
detail. (T-0). The submission must address the information sharing requirements and its 
potential impact to the DoD Information Network. In order for DoD Networks/resources 
to accommodate a program’s future bandwidth, considerations must address areas such as 
Terrestrial Transport, Satellite Transport, Internet Protocol, Voice, and Video. 
4.3.3.3.  The DoD CIO provides guidance to programs, directly or through the Air Force 
Representative to the Interoperability Steering Group.  The DoD CIO also assesses 
bandwidth supportability risks and informs the Defense Acquisition Executive of 
pertinent elevated risks through periodic summary reviews of acquisition programs. 
 
 
AFI17-140  29 JUNE 2018 
27 
 
4.3.3.4.  Detailed guidance on the DoD Bandwidth requirements process is available in 
the Defense Acquisition Guide under Section 7.11. 
 
BRADFORD J. SHWEDO, Lt Gen, USAF 
Chief of Information Dominance and 
Chief Information Officer 
28 
AFI17-140  29 JUNE 2018 
Attachment 1 
GLOSSARY OF REFERENCES AND SUPPORTING INFORMATION 
References 
AF/A5R Requirements Development Guidebook, Vol 1-4, 20 March 2018 
AFI 10-601, Operational Capability Requirements Development, 6 November 2013 
AFI 17-101, Risk Management Framework (RMF) for Air Force Information Technology (IT), 
02 February 2017 
AFI 17-110, Information Technology Portfolio Management and Capital Planning and 
Investment Control, 23 May 2018 
AFI 17-220, Spectrum Management, 16 March 2017 
AFI 33-360, Publications and Forms Management, 1 December 2015 
AFI 63-101/20-101, Integrated Life Cycle Management, 9 May 2017 
AFI 99-103, Capabilities-based Test and Evaluation, 6 April 2017 
AFMAN 17-1402, Air Force Clinger-Cohen Act (CCA) Compliance Guide, 20 June 2018 
AFMAN 33-363, Management of Records, 1 March 2008 
AFMAN 63-144, Defense Business System Life Cycle Management, 31 March 2016 
AFPD 17-1, Information Dominance Governance and Management, 12 April 2016 
Air Force Base Area Network Functional Specification, 2015 
Air Force Program Manager’s Guide for Developing and Processing Information Support Plans 
and Associated Interoperability Guidance, Version 3.0, 26 January 2016 
CJCSI 3170.01I, Joint Capabilities Integration and Development System (JCIDS), 23 January 
2015 
Defense Acquisition Guidebook, Defense Acquisition University, 
https://www.dau.mil/tools/dag 
DoD Architecture Framework (DoDAF), Version 2.02, 
http://dodcio.defense.gov/Library/DoD-Architecture-Framework/ 
DoD Cybersecurity Reference Architecture, Version 4.0, 1 Jul 2016, 
https://wmaafip.csd.disa.smil.mil 
DoD Information Enterprise Architecture Version 2.0, July 2012 
DoD Reference Architecture Description, June 2010 
DoDD 5000.01, The Defense Acquisition System, 12 May 2003 
DoDD 5200.47E, Anti-Tamper (AT), 4 September 2015 
DoDD 5250.01, Management of Intelligence Mission Data in DoD Acquisition, 22 January 2013 
AFI17-140  29 JUNE 2018 
29 
DoDD 8000.01, Management of the Department of Defense Information Enterprise, 17 March 
2016 
DoDD 8115.01, Information Technology Portfolio Management, 10 October 2005 
DoDI 4650.01, Policy and Procedures for Management and Use of the Electromagnetic 
Spectrum, 9 January 2009 
DoDI 5000.02, Operation of the Defense Acquisition System, 7 January 2015 
DoDI 5000.75, Business Systems Requirements and Acquisition, 2 February 2017 
DoDI 5200.44, Protection of Mission Critical Functions to Achieve Trusted Systems & 
Networks, 5 November 2012 
DoDI 8100.04, DoD Unified Capabilities, 9 December 2010 
DoDI 8310.01, Information Technology Standards in the DoD, 2 February 2015 
DoDI 8320.03, Unique Identification (UID) Standards for Supporting the DoD Information 
Enterprise, 4 November 2015 
DoDI 8330.01 Interoperability of Information Technology (IT), Including National Security 
Systems (NSS), 21 May 2014 
DoDI 8500.01, Cybersecurity, 14 March 2014 
DoDI 8510.01, Risk Management Framework (RMF) for DoD Information Technology (IT), 12 
March 2014 
Federal CIO Council, A Common Approach to Federal Enterprise Architecture, May 2012 
Federal Enterprise Architecture Program Management Office, Federal Enterprise Architecture 
Practice Guidance, November 2007 
Government Accountability Office, Organizational Transformation: A Framework for Assessing 
and Improving Enterprise Architecture Management, August 2010 
HAF Mission Directive 1-26, Chief Information Dominance and Chief Information Officer, 5 
February 2015 
Information Dominance Flight Plan, February 2017 
Joint Interoperability Test Command Interoperability Process Guide v2.0, 23 March 2015 
Manual for the Operations of the Joint Capabilities Integration and Development System, 12 
February 2015 
United States Air Force Strategic Master Plan, May 2015 
Prescribed Forms 
None 
Adopted Forms 
AF Form 847, Recommendation for Change of Publication 
DD Form 1494, Application for Equipment Frequency Allocation 
30 
AFI17-140  29 JUNE 2018 
Abbreviations and Acronyms 
ACAT— Acquisition Category 
AF— Air Force 
AFEA— Air Force Enterprise Architecture 
AFGM— Air Force Guidance Memorandum 
AFI— Air Force Instruction 
AFMAN— Air Force Manual 
AFPD— Air Force Policy Directive 
AFR— Air Force Reserve 
AFRIMS— Air Force Records Information Management System 
ANG— Air National Guard 
AT -Anti—Tamper 
C4ISP— Command, Control, Communications, and Computers Intelligence Support Plan 
CC— Critical Components 
CCA –Clinger-Cohen Act 
CIO— Chief Information Officer 
CJCSI— Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Instruction 
COTS -Commercial Off-the-Shelf 
CPI— Critical Program Information 
DISA— Defense Information Systems Agency 
DISR— DoD IT Standards Registry 
DITPR— DoD IT Portfolio Repository 
DM2— DoDAF Metamodel 
DoD—Department of Defense 
DoDAF— DoD Architecture Framework 
DoDD— DoD Directive 
DoDI— DoD Instruction 
EA— Enterprise Architecture 
EAMMF— Enterprise Architecture Management Maturity Framework 
EISP— Enhanced Information Support Plan 
EMD— Engineering and Manufacturing Development 
GAO— Government Accountability Office 
AFI17-140  29 JUNE 2018 
31 
GOTS -Government Off-the-Shelf 
GTG-F -Global Information Grid (GIG) Technical Guidance Federation Tool 
HAF— Headquarters United States Air Force 
HwA— Hardware Assurance 
ICTO— Interim Certificate To Operate 
ISP— Information Support Plan 
ISR— Intelligence, Surveillance, and Reconnaissance 
IT— Information Technology 
ITIPS— Information Technology Investment Portfolio Suite 
JCIDS— Joint Capabilities Integration and Development System 
JITC— Joint Interoperability Test Command 
MAJCOM— Major Command 
MCF— Mission Critical Functions 
MD— Mission Directive 
MDA— Milestone Decision Authority 
MOE— Measures of Effectiveness 
MOP— Measures of Performance 
MS— Milestone 
NR KPP –Net-Ready Key Performance Parameter 
NSS— National Security System 
PPP— Program Protection Plan 
RDS— Records Disposition Schedule 
RMF— Risk Management Framework 
SAF— Secretary of the Air Force 
SCF— Service Core Function 
SCRM— Supply Chain Risk Management 
SME— Subject Matter Expert 
SMP— Strategic Master Plan 
SoS— System of Systems 
SwA—Software Assurance 
TDL— Tactical Data Link 
TEMP— Test and Evaluation Master Plan 
32 
AFI17-140  29 JUNE 2018 
TSN—Trusted Systems & Networks 
UC—Unified Capabilities 
Terms 
Accessible — Data and services can be accessed via the Global Information Grid by users and 
applications in the enterprise. Data and services are made available to any user of applications, 
except where limited by law, policy, security classification, or operational necessity. (DoD 
Information Enterprise Architecture Version 2.0) 
Air Force Enterprise Architecture (AFEA)— The AFEA is the collection of architecture data 
from strategic guidance and Air Force segment and solution architectures that describes the 
people, processes, data, technology, and information used in the current state of Air Force 
investments and capabilities as well as future state and transition plans. 
Air Force Records Disposition Schedule (RDS)— is outlined in AFMAN 33-363, 
Management of Records. 
Air Force Strategic Master Plan (SMP)— Translates the Air Force strategy into guidance, 
goals, and objectives within a 20-year timeframe. The SMP is the primary source document for 
the development and alignment of subordinate strategic planning across the entire Air Force. The 
alignment of Air Force priorities and goals to national guidance informs planning and actions at 
successively lower level of Air Force organizations and forms the basis for the development of 
future force options and performance management plans. 
Anti-Tamper (AT)— Systems engineering activities intended to prevent or delay exploitation of 
Critical Program Information in U.S. defense systems in domestic and export configurations to 
impede countermeasure development, unintended technology transfer, or alteration of a system 
due to reverse engineering. 
Architecture— A systematic approach that organizes and guides design, analysis, planning, and 
documentation activities. (CIO Council, A Common Approach to Federal Enterprise 
Architecture) 
Architecture Consumer—An architecture consumer is a person who uses an architecture or the 
results of architecture analysis to gain information about the architecture’s subject. 
Architecture Data Repository— Stores architecture data which makes the architectures 
discoverable.  When architecture is data-driven, it is possible to conduct real-time analysis on the 
data contained within the repository. 
Authoritative Data Source— A recognized or official data source with a designated mission 
statement, source, or product to publish reliable and accurate data for subsequent use by 
customers.  An authoritative data source may be the functional combination of multiple separate 
data sources. (DoDI 8320.03) 
Capability— The ability to complete a task or execute a course of action under specified 
conditions and level of performance. (CJCSI 3170.01I) 
 
 
AFI17-140  29 JUNE 2018 
33 
Community of Interest— A collaborative group of users who exchange information in pursuit 
of their shared goals, interests, missions, or business processes, and who therefore must have a 
shared vocabulary for the information they exchange. (DoD Information Enterprise Architecture 
Version 2.0) 
Consensus Standards— Standards developed through the cooperation of all parties who have 
an interest in participating in the development and/or use of the standards. 
Countermeasures— Actions, devices, procedures, techniques, or other measures that reduce the 
vulnerability of an information system. Synonymous with security controls and safeguards. 
Critical Component (CC)— A component which is or contains ICT, including hardware, 
software, and firmware, whether custom, commercial, or otherwise developed, and which 
delivers or protects mission critical functionality of a system or which, because of the system’s 
design, may introduce vulnerability to the mission critical functions of an applicable system. 
(DoDI 5200.44) 
Critical Program Information (CPI)— U.S. capability elements that contribute to the 
warfighters’ technical advantage, which if compromised, undermines U.S. military preeminence. 
U.S. capability elements may include, but are not limited to, software algorithms and specific 
hardware residing on the system, its training equipment, or maintenance support equipment. 
Cybersecurity— Prevention of damage to, protection of, and restoration of computers, 
electronic communications systems, electronic communications services, wire communication, 
and electronic communication, including information contained therein, to ensure its availability, 
integrity, authentication, confidentiality, and nonrepudiation. 
Data Architecture— Consists of a Conceptual, Logical, and Physical representation of data. A 
Data Architecture includes abstraction, conceptual, logical, and physical models; high-level data 
concepts and their relationships; data requirements; data structures; and metadata models. 
Data Element— A unit of data for which the definition, identification, representation, and 
permissible values are specified by means of a set of attributes and are incorporated in or a part 
of an authoritative data source. 
Data Steward— Subject-matter expert for one or more authoritative data sources. 
Defense Acquisition System— The management process by which the Department of Defense 
provides effective, affordable, and timely systems to the users. (DoDD 5000.01) 
DoD IT Standards Registry (DISR)— A registry that provides a set of rules governing the 
arrangement, interaction, and interdependence of system parts or elements, whose purpose is to 
direct that a conformant system satisfies a named set of requirements. It defines the service areas, 
interfaces, standards (registry elements), and standards profiles applicable to all DoD systems. 
Use of the registry is mandated for the development and acquisition of new or modified fielded 
IT systems throughout the DoD. The DISR is accessed through the CAC-enabled GTG-F portal 
at https://gtg.csd.disa.mil. (DoDI 8310.01) 
 
 
34 
AFI17-140  29 JUNE 2018 
DoD Architecture Framework (DoDAF)— The Department of Defense Architecture 
Framework (DoDAF), Version 2.0 is the overarching, comprehensive framework and conceptual 
model enabling the development of architectures to facilitate the ability of Department of 
Defense (DoD) managers at all levels to make key decisions more effectively through organized 
information sharing across the Department, Joint Capability Areas (JCAs), Mission, Component, 
and Program boundaries. The DoDAF serves as one of the principal pillars supporting the DoD 
Chief Information Officer (CIO) in his responsibilities for development and maintenance of 
architectures required under the Clinger-Cohen Act. DoDAF is prescribed for the use and 
development of Architectural Descriptions in the Department. It also provides extensive 
guidance on the development of architectures supporting the adoption and execution of Net-
centric services within the Department.   (Background page of DoDAF website) 
Enterprise— An area of common activity and goals within an organization or between several 
organizations, where information and other resources are exchanged.  (CIO Council, A Common 
Approach to Federal Enterprise Architecture) 
Enterprise Architecture (EA)— Enterprise Architecture (EA) is a conceptual blueprint that 
defines the structure and operations of an organization. The intent of an enterprise architecture is 
to determine how an organization can most effectively achieve its current and future objectives.  
(http://searchcio.techtarget.com/definition/enterprise-architecture) 
Enterprise Information Model— Provides a high level view of all data available throughout 
the enterprise.  It consists of an enterprise data dictionary containing registered authoritative data 
sources, an information asset catalog, and a services registry that describes enterprise services 
that utilize cataloged information assets and display outputs of operationalizing data. 
Flight Plan— A document generated to achieve alignment across functional areas, influence 
resourcing decisions, provide informative inputs to support plans, or direct discrete activities (i.e. 
non-Core Function-related). Flight Plans must be aligned with Air Force Strategy and the 
Strategic Master Plan. Flight plans may also be used to develop a Planning Choice Proposal. 
(USAF Strategic Master Plan) 
Hardware Assurance (HwA)— The level of confidence that hardware functions only as 
intended and is free of vulnerabilities, defects, and weaknesses, either intentionally or 
unintentionally designed or inserted as part of the hardware throughout the life cycle. 
Information Asset— A documented data element, or, an aggregation of data elements, that has 
meaning based on its collective context; can come from one or more authoritative data sources. 
Information Support Plan— The Information Support Plan is a technical document required by 
DoDI 5000.02 and DoDI 8330.01 that provides Program Managers a means to identify and 
resolve potential information support implementation issues and risks that, if not properly 
managed, will limit or restrict the ability of a program to be operationally employed to support 
existing and future mission requirements. 
Information Technology (IT)— Any equipment or interconnected system or subsystem of 
equipment used in the automatic acquisition, storage, manipulation, management, movement, 
control, display, switching, interchange, transmission, or reception of data or information by the 
executive agency. This includes if the equipment is used by the executive agency directly or is 
used by a contractor under a contract with the executive agency that requires the use of that 
equipment; or of that equipment to a significant extent in the performance of a service or the 
AFI17-140  29 JUNE 2018 
35 
furnishing of a product. IT includes computers, ancillary equipment, software, firmware, and 
similar procedures, services (including support services), and related resources, but does not 
include any equipment acquired by a federal contractor incidental to a federal contract. (DoDD 
8000.01) 
Interoperability— The ability of systems, units, or forces to provide data, information, materiel, 
and services to, and accept the same from, other systems, units, or forces, and to use the data, 
information, materiel, and services exchanged to enable them to operate effectively together. IT 
interoperability includes both the technical exchange of information and the end-to-end 
operational effectiveness of that exchange of information as required for mission 
accomplishment. Interoperability is more than just information exchange. It includes systems, 
processes, procedures, organizations, and missions over the life cycle and must be balanced with 
cybersecurity (formerly information assurance). (DoDI 8330.01) 
IT Portfolio Management— The management of selected groupings of IT resources using 
strategic planning, architectures, and outcome-based performance measures to achieve a mission 
capability. (DoDD 8115.01) 
Joint Capabilities Integration and Development System (JCIDS)— A process used by the 
Joint Requirements Oversight Council to fulfill its statutory responsibilities to the Chairman of 
the Joint Chiefs of Staff (CJCS), including but not limited to identifying, assessing, validating, 
and prioritizing joint military capability requirements. (CJCSI 3170.01I) 
Mission Areas (MA)— A defined area of responsibility with functions and processes that 
contribute to mission accomplishment. (Definitions) The DoD Mission Areas are the 
Warfighting Mission Area (WMA), Business Mission Area (BMA), DoD portion of Intelligence 
Mission Area (DIMA), and Enterprise Information Environment (EIE) Mission Area (EIEMA). 
(para. 2.2.) (DoDD 8115.01) 
Mission Critical Functions (MCF)— Any function, the compromise of which would degrade 
the system effectiveness in achieving the core mission for which it was designed. (DoDI 
5200.44) 
National Security System (NSS)— (2)(A) The term “national security system” means any 
information system (including any telecommunications system) used or operated by an agency or 
by a contractor of an agency, or other organization on behalf of an agency(i) the function, 
operation, or use of which- (I) involves intelligence activities; (II) involves cryptologic activities 
related to national security; (III) involves command and control of military forces; (IV) involves 
equipment that is an integral part of a weapon or weapon system; or (V) subject to subparagraph 
(B), is critical to the direct fulfillment of military or intelligence missions; or (ii) is protected at 
all times by procedures established for information that have been specifically authorized under 
criteria established by an Executive order or an Act of Congress to be kept classified in the 
interest of national defense or foreign policy. (B) Subparagraph (A)(i)(V) does not include a 
system that is to be used for routine administrative and business applications, including payroll, 
finance, logistics and personnel management applications). (44 United States Code 3542(b)). 
 
 
36 
AFI17-140  29 JUNE 2018 
Net—Ready Key Performance Parameter - The NR KPP identifies operational, net-centric 
requirements in terms of threshold and objective values for Measures of Effectives (MOE) and 
Measures of Performance (MOP). The NR KPP covers all communication, computing, and 
electromagnetic spectrum requirements involving information elements among producer, sender, 
receiver, and consumer. Information elements include the information, product, and service 
exchanges. These exchanges enable successful completion of the warfighter mission or joint 
business processes. 
Program — A directed, funded effort that provides a new, improved, or continuing materiel, 
weapon, or information system, or service capability in response to an approved need. (Defense 
Acquisition University Glossary) 
Program Protection Plan (PPP)— A risk-based, comprehensive, living plan to guide efforts for 
managing the risks to CPI and mission-critical functions and components. 
Program Protection Planning— The integrating process for managing risks to advanced 
technology and mission-critical system functionality from foreign collection, design vulnerability 
or supply chain exploit/insertion, and battlefield loss throughout the acquisition lifecycle. 
Reference Architecture— An authoritative source of information about a specific subject area 
that guides and constrains the instantiations of multiple architectures and solutions. (DoD 
Reference Architecture Description, June 2010) 
Risk Management Framework (RMF)— A structured approach used to oversee and manage 
risk for an enterprise. 
Segment Architecture— Describes individual elements of the enterprise, such as core mission 
areas, common or shared business services, and enterprise services.  Segment architecture has a 
baseline (as-is), as well as a target (to-be) and a transition strategy for a portion or segment of the 
enterprise. (Federal Enterprise Architecture Practice Guidance, 2007) 
Service Core Functions (SCF)— Functional areas that delineate the appropriate and assigned 
core duties, missions, and tasks of the Air Force as an organization, responsibility for each of 
which is assigned to a Core Function Lead. SCFs express the ways in which the USAF is 
particularly and appropriately suited to contribute to national security, although they do not 
necessarily express every aspect of what the USAF contributes to the nation. 
Software Assurance (SwA)—The level of confidence that software functions as intended and is 
free of vulnerabilities, either intentionally or unintentionally designed or inserted as part of the 
software throughout the lifecycle. (DoDI 5200.44) 
Solution— A materiel or non-materiel opportunity or solution to satisfy one or more capability 
gaps/reduce or eliminate one or more capability gaps. (JCIDS Manual) 
Solution Architecture— Solution Architecture defines the architecture in sufficient level of 
detail required to implement solutions to meet the business requirements and ensures alignment 
with the enterprise architecture. 
Supply Chain Risk Management (SCRM)— A systematic process for managing supply chain 
risk by identifying susceptibilities, vulnerabilities and threats throughout DoD’s “supply chain” 
and developing mitigation strategies to combat those threats whether presented by the supplier, 
the supplied product and its subcomponents, or the supply chain (e.g., initial production, 
packaging, handling, storage, transport, mission operation, and disposal). (DoDI 5200.44) 
AFI17-140  29 JUNE 2018 
37 
Supportability— The ability of the system to identify and/or predict failures down to a certain 
subsystem level within a given percentage of accuracy. (JCIDS Manual) 
Target Architecture— The representation of a desired future state or "to be built" for the 
enterprise within the context of the strategic direction.  (CIO Council, A Common Approach to 
Federal Enterprise Architecture) 
Trusted Systems and Networks (TSN)— A comprehensive systematic approach that analyzes 
threats, vulnerabilities, and mitigation strategies to preserve mission assurance. 
Understandable— Users and applications can comprehend the data, both structurally and 
semantically, and readily determine how the data may be used for their specific needs. (DoD 
Information Enterprise Architecture Version 2.0) 
Vulnerability— Weakness in an information system, system security procedures, internal 
controls, or implementation that could be exploited by a threat source. 
 
