BY ORDER OF THE  
SECRETARY OF THE AIR FORCE 
 
DEPARTMENT OF THE AIR FORCE 
POLICY DIRECTIVE 17-2 
27 OCTOBER 2020 
Cyberspace 
CYBER WARFARE OPERATIONS 
COMPLIANCE WITH THIS PUBLICATION IS MANDATORY 
 
ACCESSIBILITY:  Publications and forms are available on the e-Publishing website at 
www.e-publishing.af.mil for downloading or ordering. 
RELEASABILITY:  There are no releasability restrictions on this publication 
 
 
OPR: AF/A2/6CX / A3C 
 
Supersedes: 
AFPD 17-2, 12 April 2016 
Certified by: AF/A2/6  
(Lt Gen Mary F. O’Brien) 
Pages: 11 
 
 
This publication implements Department of Defense Instruction (DoDI) 3222.03, DoD 
Electromagnetic Environmental Effects (E3) Program; DoDI O-3710.02, Secretary of Defense 
Communications (SDC); DoDI 3780.01, Senior Leader Communications Modernization; DoDI 
4630.09, Communication Waveform Management and Standardization; DoDI 4650.01, Policy 
and Procedures for Management and Use of the Electromagnetic Spectrum; DoDI 4650.02, 
Military Auxiliary Radio System (MARS); DoDI 4650.10, Land Mobile Radio (LMR) 
Interoperability and Standardization; DoDI 8320.05, Electromagnetic Spectrum Data Sharing; 
and DoDI 8420.02, DoD Satellite Communications (SATCOM).  It establishes Cyber Warfare 
Operations policy to support the warfighter and achieve national security objectives.  This 
publication applies to all Department of the Air Force organizations, employees, including 
civilian and contractor personnel.  Ensure all records generated as a result of processes 
prescribed in this publication adhere to Air Force Instruction 33-322, Records Management and 
Information Governance Program and are disposed in accordance with the Air Force Records 
Disposition Schedule which is located in the Air Force Records Information Management 
System.  Refer recommended changes and questions about this publication to the office of 
primary responsibility using the Air Force Form 847, Recommendation for Change of 
Publication; route Air Force Forms 847 from the field through the appropriate functional chain 
of command.  This publication may not be supplemented. 
SUMMARY OF CHANGES 
This document has been substantially revised and must be completely reviewed.  Major changes 
include organizational changes and the division of former Information Dominance and Chief 
2 
DAFPD17-2  27 OCTOBER 2020 
Information Officer (SAF/CIO A6) responsibilities between the Deputy Chief Information 
Officer (SAF/CN) and the Deputy Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Surveillance, Reconnaissance, and 
Cyber Effects Operations (AF/A2/6).  It also recognizes the redesignation of Air Force Space 
Command as the United States Space Force.  This publication defines the term “Cyber Warfare 
Operations” and is not intended to expand the role of Air Force cyberspace activities beyond the 
current scope authorized by Department of Defense, Chairman Joint Chief of Staff, and 
Combatant Command operational authorities.  It formalizes the shift of Lead Command 
responsibilities for the Cyber Warfare Operations mission area from Air Force Space Command 
to Air Combat Command, assignment of Lead Service responsibilities for enterprise satellite 
communications to the United States Space Force, and defines those responsibilities. 
1.  OVERVIEW. 
1.1.  This Directive establishes Air Force policy for planning and executing operations to 
create offensive and defensive effects in cyberspace and for providing communications 
capability to warfighting forces under proper Department of Defense authorities.  Cyberspace 
is critical to all Department of the Air Force operations and cyber warfare operations are key 
to enabling successful multi-domain operations while supporting Combatant Command 
objectives.  Synchronization and unity of effort are critical in the cyberspace domain, which 
is trans-regional and enables instantaneous global effects. 
1.2.  In addition, cyber warfare operations includes operations to extend or modify the Air 
Force’s portion of the Department of Defense Information Network for the purpose of 
providing communications capability to warfighting forces.  Note:  Such operations do not 
include, or refer to, cyberspace activities, investigations, operations or the conduct of cyber 
effects operations and activities conducted by the Air Force Office of Special Investigations 
for law enforcement or counterintelligence purposes. 
2.  POLICY.  The Department of the Air Force will: 
2.1.  Contribute to the joint force’s attainment of cyberspace superiority by fully exploiting 
cyberspace to execute, enhance and support Department of the Air Force core missions 
directly supporting joint objectives. 
2.2.  Provide global, assured, resilient satellite, airborne, and terrestrial communications 
networks for warfighters in support of Department of the Air Force core missions. 
2.3.  Execute cyber warfare operations to support joint warfighter requirements, increase 
effectiveness of its core missions, and increase resiliency and survivability of its information, 
systems, and missions. 
2.3.1.  The Department of the Air Force will develop cyberspace weapons and weapon 
systems; cyberspace capabilities; operational tactics, techniques, and procedures; and 
maintenance procedures to fully support assigned and authorized roles and missions. 
2.3.2.  Cyber warfare operations will be conducted by Airmen trained and certified in 
accordance with applicable Department of Defense, Joint, and Intelligence Community 
directives and authorities. 
2.4.  Establish Air Combat Command as the lead command for the cyber warfare operations 
mission area via this directive, with Department of the Air Force responsibilities for 
organizing, training, and equipping forces to conduct cyber warfare operations.  United 
DAFPD17-2  27 OCTOBER 2020 
3 
States Space Force and United States Air Force will realign roles and responsibilities for 
Service-Retained forces (such as Mission Defense Teams) which have not been designated as 
a cyber operational force.  Forces that enable tactical command and control or weapons 
systems and critical infrastructure will be designated at a later date. 
2.5.  Establish the United States Space Force as the lead service for Department of the Air 
Force enterprise satellite communications operations via this directive, with service-wide 
responsibilities for organizing, training, and equipping forces to conduct those operations.  
United States Space Force, in concert with Department of the Air Force commands, will 
maintain clear, detailed, and measurable standards in this mission area to ensure efficient 
employment and interoperability of forces. 
2.6.  Integrate cyber warfare operations with the separate and distinct activities of 
electromagnetic warfare; information operations; and intelligence, surveillance, and 
reconnaissance, as well as other relevant operational activities, to produce information 
warfare capabilities to support combatant command objectives. 
3.  ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES. 
3.1.  Deputy Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Surveillance, Reconnaissance, and Cyber 
Effects Operations (AF/A2/6)  will: 
3.1.1.  In coordination with the Deputy Chief of Staff, Operations (AF/A3), develop 
cyber warfare operations doctrine, requirements, strategy, policy, guidance, standards, 
and concepts, and integrate them where appropriate with the separate and distinct Air 
Force Intelligence, Surveillance, and Reconnaissance enterprise. 
3.1.2.  In coordination with the Deputy Chief Information Officer (SAF/CN), develop 
doctrine, requirements, strategy, policy, guidance, standards, and concepts to support 
global, assured, resilient satellite, airborne, and terrestrial communications networks for 
warfighters in support of Air Force core missions. 
3.1.3.  Provide functional oversight, force development, and talent management for 
cyber-focused Department of the Air Force career fields. 
3.1.3.1.  When United States Space Force has been authorized, it will provide 
functional oversight, force development, and talent management for cyber-focused 
United States Space Force assigned career fields. 
3.1.4.  Oversee development and cybersecurity of Intelligence, Surveillance, and 
Reconnaissance capabilities, resources, products, and services to support cyberspace 
operational requirements. 
3.1.5.  Ensure development of Cyberspace Intelligence, Surveillance, and Reconnaissance 
tactics, techniques, and procedures; guidance; and policies. 
3.1.6.  Retain responsibility for policy, as well as oversight of lead command 
implementation of DoDI 3222.03; DoDI O-3710.02; DoDI 3780.01; DoDI 4630.09; 
DoDI 4650.01; DoDI 4650.02; DoDI 4650.10; DoDI 8320.05; and DoDI 8420.02. 
3.1.7.  In accordance with Department of Defense Directive S-3710.01, National 
Leadership Command Capability (NLCC) (U), coordinate with and support the Deputy 
Chief of Staff, Strategic Deterrence and Nuclear Integration (AF/A10) and other 
4 
DAFPD17-2  27 OCTOBER 2020 
Department of Defense agencies to provide guidance and policy for cyber warfare 
operations on behalf of the Nuclear Enterprise.  This includes the nuclear command, 
control and communications mission area, as well as nuclear delivery platforms and 
systems. 
3.1.8.  Provide oversight of Department of Air Force senior leader communications 
modernization efforts as executed through and by the major commands in accordance 
with DoDI 3780.01. 
3.1.9.  Ensure Department of Air Force compliance with Department of Defense 
waveform management policy and processes in accordance with DoDI 4630.09. 
3.1.10.  Provide policy, guidance, resource advocacy and oversight for the management 
of Air Force electromagnetic spectrum in accordance with DoDI 4650.01 and DoDI 
8320.05. 
3.1.11.  Oversee the Military Auxiliary Radio System in accordance with DoDI 4650.02. 
3.1.12.  Ensure Air Force compliance with Department of Defense land mobile radio 
interoperability and standardization policy and processes in accordance with DoDI 
4650.10. 
3.1.13.  Coordinate with United States Space Force and AF/A3 to ensure Air Force 
compliance with Department of Defense satellite communications policy and processes in 
accordance with DoDI 8420.02. 
3.2.  Deputy Chief of Staff, Operations (AF/A3)  will: 
3.2.1.  In coordination with the AF/A2/6, provide guidance and oversight for the 
command and control and conduct of cyber warfare operations, develop plans, and 
provide guidance to integrate cyberspace operational capabilities with air and space 
capabilities. 
3.2.2.  Have primary responsibility for oversight of Air Force day to day operations, 
including cyberspace operations.  This responsibility in no way should be read to infringe 
upon operations and activities assigned or reserved to a Functional or Combatant 
Command, to the Air Force Deputy Chief Information Officer by law or in Air Force 
Policy Directive 17-1, Information Dominance Governance and Management; to the Air 
Force Chief Data Officer by law or in Air Force policy; or to the Commander, Air Force 
Office of Special Investigations (AFOSI/CC) by law, regulation, or in Air Force policy. 
3.2.3.  Coordinate allocation of Air Force cyber forces and cyber warfare operations 
capabilities as requested via the Global Force Management process. 
3.3.  The Air Force Director of Test and Evaluation (AF/TE)  will: 
3.3.1.  Develop test policy and provide guidance and oversight to ensure comprehensive 
cyber test of Department of the Air Force assets, consistent with Department of the Air 
Force and Department of Defense policies. 
3.3.2.  Ensure Department of the Air Force test and evaluation infrastructure utilizes 
latest cyber-related intelligence data to provide an operationally representative cyber 
environment for test and evaluation. 
DAFPD17-2  27 OCTOBER 2020 
5 
3.4.  The Deputy Chief Information Officer (SAF/CN)  will provide policy and guidance 
to foster an operationally resilient, reliable, and secure Department of the Air Force 
Information Network which meets Department of Defense and Department of the Air Force 
requirements. 
3.5.  The General Counsel (SAF/GC) and the Judge Advocate General (AF/JA)  will 
advise the Department of the Air Force and the services on legal matters related to 
cyberspace operations. 
3.6.  The Inspector General (SAF/IG)  will: 
3.6.1.  Validate functional inspection criteria in coordination with respective Combatant 
Command Inspector General to ensure that Department of the Air Force cyberspace 
capabilities are properly developed in response to documented requirements, and 
cyberspace operations are being executed appropriately. 
3.6.2.  Through the AFOSI/CC, investigate allegations of criminal, fraudulent, espionage, 
and other illegal activities conducted in cyberspace.  Conduct the full range of 
counterintelligence cyber activities to protect the Department of the Air Force's core 
missions and when properly authorized, support cyber warfare operations. 
3.6.2.1.  Law enforcement and counterintelligence cyber activities, investigations, 
operations, and capabilities developed by Air Force Office of Special Investigations 
to conduct missions pursuant to the Air Force Mission Directive 39, Air Force Office 
of Special Investigations (AFOSI), are approved by the AFOSI/CC according to the 
delegated independent authority of the AFOSI/CC in the Air Force Policy Directive 
71-1, Criminal Investigations and Counterintelligence. 
3.6.2.2.  Counterintelligence in cyberspace activities, operations, and capabilities 
developed by Air Force Office of Special Investigations to conduct missions pursuant 
to Air Force Mission Directive 39, Air Force Office of Special Investigations 
(AFOSI), are approved by the AFOSI/CC according to the delegated independent 
authority of the AFOSI/CC in Air Force Policy Directive 71-1, Criminal 
Investigations and Counterintelligence. 
3.6.2.3.  These cyber capabilities are not used in military operations, but under law 
enforcement or counterintelligence authorities; as such, Air Force Office of Special 
Investigations may execute cyber warfare operations for counterintelligence purposes. 
3.6.3.  Oversee execution of Executive Agent responsibilities regarding the Department 
of Defense Cyber Crime Center digital and multimedia forensics, threat analysis, and 
cyber training functions in support of criminal investigations and counterintelligence, as 
delegated in Headquarters Air Force Mission Directive 1-20, The Inspector General, to 
support Air Force cyber warfare operations. 
3.7.  Commander, Air Combat Command  (ACC/CC) will: 
3.7.1.  Serve as the Lead Command for the cyber warfare operations mission area. 
3.7.1.1.  Be responsible for publishing any implementing Departmental-level 
guidance required by DoDI 3222.03; DoDI O-3710.02; DoDI 3780.01; DoDI 
4630.09; DoDI 4650.01; DoDI 4650.02; DoDI 4650.10, and DoDI 8320.05. 
6 
DAFPD17-2  27 OCTOBER 2020 
3.7.1.2.  In coordination with other commands, develop tactics, techniques, and 
procedures and mission essential task lists necessary to effect cyber warfare 
operations integration, to include complementary and interoperable command 
relationships and command and control procedures. 
3.7.1.3.  Oversee deployment and management of Department of the Air Force-
approved cyberspace weapon systems and cyberspace capabilities, other than those 
employed for law enforcement or counterintelligence purposes. In concert with other 
commands, maintain clear, detailed, and measurable standards in the cyber warfare 
operations mission area to ensure efficient employment and interoperability of forces. 
3.7.1.4.  Manage and oversee the sustainment, modernization and future force 
development of cyber warfare operations capabilities and weapon systems, and 
ensure their inclusion in appropriate processes, such as: strategic planning, 
programming, budgeting and execution cycles; Air Force corporate governance; joint 
capabilities integrations and developments; and defense acquisition systems. 
3.7.1.5.  Manage the process to identify future cyberspace requirements and 
modernization needs, and incorporate them into the Air Force and joint modernization 
planning processes to include the Joint Capabilities Integration and Development 
System. 
3.7.1.6.  Establish, in coordination with the other commands, the command and 
control process for cyber warfare operations, to include the interfaces with United 
States Cyber Command, the theater-level air operations centers, and air expeditionary 
task forces. 
3.7.1.7.  Formulate and manage cyber warfare operations baseline inspection and 
evaluation standards, regardless of command. 
3.7.1.8.  Develop and publish, with the full participation and coordination of other 
supported commands and in coordination with mandatory and appropriate offices at 
Headquarters Air Force, related publications supporting this directive.  Specific 
guidance for lead command guidance may be found in Department of Air Force 
Instruction 33-360, Publications and Forms Management. 
3.7.1.9.  Issue cyberspace orders on behalf of the Secretary of the Air Force for the 
command and control, implementation, operation, maintenance, sustainment, 
configuration, and defense of the Air Force Information Network.  Note:  For 
clarification of the distinction between cybersecurity and cyberspace defense, see 
Attachment 1. 
3.7.1.10.  In coordination with the Chief Information Security Officer, issue direction 
for the security of the Department of the Air Force Information Network. 
3.7.1.11.  Manage the Department of the Air Force Cyber Mission Force enterprise, to 
include funds and force presentation to United States Cyber Command through Air 
Forces Cyber Forces. 
3.7.1.12.  Manage the Mission Defense Team program to enable tactical command 
and control of weapons systems and critical infrastructure resiliency.  Enable Mission 
Defense Teams with information/intelligence, access, authority, and capability. 
DAFPD17-2  27 OCTOBER 2020 
7 
3.8.  United States Space Force  will: 
3.8.1.  Serve as lead service for Department of the Air Force enterprise satellite 
communications operations. 
3.8.2.  Be responsible for publishing implementing guidance required by DoDI 8420.02 
in accordance with authority delegated from the Secretary of the Air Force. 
3.8.3.  Develop and publish, with the full participation and coordination of other 
supported commands and in coordination with AF/A2/6 and AF/A3, related publications 
supporting this directive. 
3.8.4.  When fully authorized, develop service-specific implementing policies and 
guidance unique to United States Space Force for assigned roles and responsibilities. 
3.8.5.  Direct United States Space Force-assigned mission defense teams when agreed 
between Chief of Staff of the Air Force and Chief of Space Operations to manage 
Service-level organize, train and equip of mission defense teams in support of United 
States Space Force space mission systems. 
3.9.  Headquarters Air Force Functionals, Major Commands, Direct Reporting Units, 
and Field Operating Agencies  will: 
3.9.1.  Retain responsibility for accomplishing the above duties for command or mission-
unique equipment, modifications, and missions. 
3.9.2.  Participate in the development of Lead Command or Lead Service guidance, and 
adhere to such guidance when it is specified to apply to all commands. 
3.9.3.  Follow applicable policy, including Lead Command or Lead Service guidance, 
and cyberspace orders when executing cyberspace operations. 
 
Barbara M. Barrett 
Secretary of the Air Force 
8 
DAFPD17-2  27 OCTOBER 2020 
Attachment 1 
GLOSSARY OF REFERENCES AND SUPPORTING INFORMATION 
References 
Title 50, Code of Federal Regulations, Section 44 
DoDI 3222.03, DoD Electromagnetic Environmental Effects (E3) Program, 10 October 2017 
DoDD-S 3710.01, National Leadership Command Capability (NLCC) (U), 27 May 2015 
DoDI O-3710.02, Secretary of Defense Communications (SDC), 20 October 2014 
DoDI O-3780.01, Senior Leader Secure Communications Modernization (SLSCM), 22 May 2014 
DoDI 4630.09, Communication Waveform Management and Standardization, 15 July 2015 
DoDI 4650.02, Military Auxiliary Radio System (MARS), 23 December 2009 
DoDI 4650.01, Policy and Procedures for Management and Use of the Electromagnetic 
Spectrum, 17 October 2017 
DoDI 4650.10, Land Mobile Radio (LMR) Interoperability and Standardization, 28 July 2015 
DoDI 8320.05, Electromagnetic Spectrum Data Sharing, 22 November 2017 
DoDI 8420.02, DoD Satellite Communications (SATCOM), 15 September 2016 
DoDI 8500.01, Cybersecurity, 14 March 2014 
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff PLANORD, 181807Z, 18 April 2017 
JP 1, Doctrine for the Armed Forces of the United States, 25 March 2013 
JP 2-01, Joint and National Intelligence Support to Military Operations, 5 July 2017 
JP 3-0, Joint Operations, 22 October 2018 
JP 3-12, Cyberspace Operations, 8 June 2018 
JP 3-13, Information Operations, 27 November 2012 
JP 3-13.1, Electronic Warfare, 8 February 2012 
JP 3-30, Joint Air Operations, 25 July 2019 
JP 6-0, Joint Communications System, 10 June 2015 
Air Force Doctrine Annex 3-51, Electromagnetic Warfare and Electromagnetic Spectrum 
Operations, 30 July 2019 
HAFMD 1-20, The Inspector General, 7 May 2015 
AFMD 39, Air Force Office of Special Investigations (AFOSI), 14 April 2020 
AFPD 17-1, Information Dominance Governance and Management, 12 April 2016 
AFPD 71-1, Criminal Investigations and Counterintelligence, 1 July 2019 
DAFI 33-360, Publications and Forms Management, 1 December 2015 
AFI 33-322, Records Management and Information Governance Program, 23 March 2020 
DAFPD17-2  27 OCTOBER 2020 
9 
AFI 51-401, The Law of War, 3 August 2018 
Prescribed Forms 
None 
Adopted Forms 
AF Form 847, Recommendation for Change of Publication 
Abbreviations and Acronyms 
adj.—Adjective 
AFI—Air Force Instruction 
AFMD—Air Force Mission Directive 
AFPD—Air Force Policy Directive 
DoDI—Department of Defense Instruction 
HAFMD—Headquarters Air Force Mission Directive 
n.—Noun 
Terms 
Air Expeditionary Task Force—A deployed numbered air force or command echelon 
immediately subordinate to a numbered air force provided as the United States Air Force 
component command committed to a joint operation.  (JP 3-30) 
Air Force Information Network—The set of Air Force information capabilities and associated 
processes for collecting, processing, storing, disseminating, and managing information on-
demand to warfighters, policy makers, and support personnel, whether interconnected or stand-
alone, including owned and leased communications and computing systems and services, 
software (including applications), data, security services, other associated services, and national 
security systems.  (Derived from the JP 6-0 definition of Department of Defense Information 
Network) 
Command and Control—The exercise of authority and direction by a properly designated 
commander over assigned and attached forces in the accomplishment of the mission. (JP 1) 
Cyber (adj.)—Of or pertaining to the cyberspace environment, capabilities, plans, or operations. 
Cybersecurity—Prevention of damage to, protection of, and restoration of computers, electronic 
communications systems, electronic communications services, wire communication, and 
electronic communication, including information contained therein, to ensure its availability, 
integrity, authentication, confidentiality, and nonrepudiation.  (DoDI 8500.01) 
Cyberspace (n. or adj.)—A global domain within the information environment consisting of the 
interdependent network of information technology infrastructures and resident data, including 
the Internet, telecommunications networks, computer systems, and embedded processors and 
controllers.  (JP 3-12)  Note:  Synonymous with cyber when used as an adjective. 
10 
DAFPD17-2  27 OCTOBER 2020 
Cyberspace Attack—Actions taken in cyberspace that create noticeable denial effects (i.e., 
degradation, disruption, or destruction) in cyberspace or manipulation that leads to denial that 
appears in a physical domain, and is considered a form of fires.  (JP 3-12) 
Cyberspace Defense—Actions taken within protected cyberspace to defeat specific threats that 
have breached or are threatening to breach cyberspace security measures and include actions to 
detect, characterize, counter, and mitigate threats, including malware or the unauthorized 
activities of users, and to restore the system to a secure configuration.  (JP 3-12) 
Cyberspace Exploitation—Actions taken in cyberspace to gain intelligence, maneuver, collect 
information, or perform other enabling actions required to prepare for future military operations. 
(JP 3-12) 
Cyberspace Operations—The employment of cyberspace capabilities where the primary 
purpose is to achieve objectives or effects in or through cyberspace.  (JP 3-0) 
Cyberspace Superiority—The degree of dominance in cyberspace by one force that permits the 
secure, reliable conduct of operations by that force and its related land, air, maritime, and space 
forces at a given time and place without prohibitive interference.  (JP 3-12) 
Cyber Warfare Operations—Operations undertaken by Air Force forces to conduct 
Cyberspace Attack, Cyberspace Exploitation, or Cyberspace Defense, when assigned or attached 
to and authorized by a Combatant Command, and to extend or modify the Department of 
Defense Information Network for the purpose of providing communications capability to 
warfighting forces.  Such operations do not include cyber warfare operations activities conducted 
by Air Force Office of Special Investigations for counterintelligence purposes.  (DAFPD 17-2) 
Department of Defense Information Network—The set of information capabilities, and 
associated processes for collecting, processing, storing, disseminating, and managing 
information on-demand to warfighters, policy makers, and support personnel, whether 
interconnected or stand-alone, including owned and leased communications and computing 
systems and services, software (including applications), data, security services, other associated 
services, and national security systems.  (JP 6-0) 
Electromagnetic Spectrum—The range of frequencies of electromagnetic radiation from zero 
to infinity. It is divided into 26 alphabetically designated bands.  (JP 3-13.1) 
Electromagnetic Warfare—Military action involving the use of electromagnetic and directed 
energy to control the electromagnetic spectrum or to attack the enemy.  (Air Force Doctrine 
Annex 3-51) 
Information Operations—The integrated employment, during military operations, of 
information-related capabilities in concert with other lines of operation to influence, disrupt, 
corrupt, or usurp the decision-making of adversaries and potential adversaries while protecting 
our own.  (JP 3-13) 
Information Warfare—The employment of military capabilities in and through the information 
environment to deliberately affect adversary human and system behavior and to preserve friendly 
freedom of action during cooperation, competition, and conflict. 
Intelligence Community—See 50 U.S.C. §3003 (4) 
DAFPD17-2  27 OCTOBER 2020 
11 
Intelligence, Surveillance, and Reconnaissance (ISR)—1.  An integrated operations and 
intelligence activity that synchronizes and integrates the planning and operation of sensors, 
assets, and processing, exploitation, and dissemination systems in direct support of current and 
future  operations.  2.  The organizations or assets conducting such activities.  (JP 2-01) 
Mission-Relevant Terrain in Cyberspace—Defined as but not limited to all devices, 
internal/external links, operating systems, services, applications, ports, protocols, hardware, and 
software on servers required to enable the function of a critical asset.  Mission-relevant terrain in 
cyberspace may exist external to the Department of Defense cyberspace.  (Chairman of the Joint 
Chiefs of Staff PLANORD, 181807Z Apr 17) 
Weapon—A device designed to kill, injure, disable or temporarily incapacitate people or 
destroy, damage, disable or temporarily incapacitate property or materiel. The term “weapon” 
does not include a device developed and used for training, or launch platforms to include aircraft 
and intercontinental ballistic missiles.  (AFI 51-401) 
Weapon System—A combination of one or more weapons with all related equipment, materials, 
services, personnel, and means of delivery and deployment (if applicable) required for self-
sufficiency.  (JP 3-0)  Note:  The term “Cyberspace Weapon System” is used in this directive as 
a means to identify requirements and critical resources requiring program-associated funding, but 
is not dispositive as to whether a particular resource is actually a “weapon system” as defined in 
JP 3-0, or a “weapon” as defined in AFI 51-401. 
 
