BY ORDER OF THE  
SECRETARY OF THE AIR FORCE 
 
AIR FORCE INSTRUCTION 17-110 
23 MAY 2018 
Cyberspace Operations 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
PORTFOLIO MANAGEMENT AND 
CAPITAL PLANNING AND 
INVESTMENT CONTROL 
COMPLIANCE WITH THIS PUBLICATION IS MANDATORY 
 
ACCESSIBILITY:  Publications and forms are available on the e-Publishing website at 
www.e-publishing.af.mil for downloading or ordering. 
RELEASABILITY:  There are no releasability restrictions on this publication. 
 
 
OPR: SAF/CIO A6XM 
 
Supersedes:  AFI33-141, 23 December 2008 
Certified by: SAF/CIO A6X  
(Mr. Arthur “A.G.” Hatcher) 
Pages: 33 
 
 
This instruction implements Air Force Policy Directive (AFPD) 17-1, Information Dominance 
Governance and Management, Headquarters Air Force Mission Directive (HAF MD) 1-26, 
Chief, Information Dominance and Chief Information Officer, Department of Defense (DoD) 
Directive 8115.01, Information Technology Portfolio Management, DoD Instruction 8115.02, 
Information Technology Portfolio Management Implementation. It assigns responsibilities and 
provides guidance for Information Technology Portfolio Management and conducting Capital 
Planning and Investment Control for Information Technology investments throughout the Air 
Force. It applies to individuals at all levels who manage Information Technology resources 
including the Air Force Reserve and Air National Guard except where noted otherwise. This 
publication may be supplemented at any level, but all supplements must be routed to the Office 
of Primary Responsibility (OPR) listed above for coordination prior to certification and approval. 
Refer recommended changes and questions about this publication to the OPR listed above using 
the Air Force Form 847, Recommendation for Change of Publication; route Air Force Form 847 
from the field through the appropriate chain of command. The authorities to waive wing/unit 
level requirements in this publication are identified with a Tier (“T-0, T-1, T-2, T-3”) number 
following the compliance statement. See Air Force Instruction 33-360, Publications and Forms 
Management, for a description of the authorities associated with the Tier numbers. Submit 
requests for waivers through the chain of command to the appropriate Tier waiver approval 
authority, or alternately, to the requested commander for non-tiered compliance items. Ensure 
that all records created as a result of processes prescribed in this publication are maintained in 
accordance with Air Force Manual (AFMAN) 33-363, Management of Records, and disposed of 
2 
AFI17-110  23 MAY 2018 
in accordance with the Air Force Records Disposition Schedule in the Air Force Records 
Information Management System. 
SUMMARY OF CHANGES 
This is a total revision of Air Force Instruction 17-110, Air Force Information Technology 
Portfolio Management and IT Investment Review, dated 23 December 2008. This document has 
been substantially revised and formalizes the Information Technology Portfolio Management 
process and identifies the processes in which Capital Planning and Investment Control elements 
are accomplished. A complete revision to the guidance and responsibilities for performing 
Information Technology Portfolio Management throughout the Department is provided herein. 
The guidance prescribed in this document is consistent with the statutory and regulatory 
requirements, executive guidance and best practices in applicable policies listed above. The Air 
Force shall comply with the Portfolio Management/Capital Planning and Investment Control and 
Information Technology management guidelines listed herein. 
 
Chapter 1— INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY PORTFOLIO MANAGEMENT AND 
CAPITAL PLANNING AND INVESTMENT CONTROL  
 
4 
1.1. 
 Purpose and Overview of Information Technology Portfolio Management and 
Capital Planning and Investment Control. ...............................................................  
4 
1.2. 
 Portfolio Management and Capital Planning and Investment Control Concepts. ..  
5 
1.3. 
 Portfolio Management and Capital Planning and Investment Control Objectives.   
5 
1.4. 
 Portfolio Governance. .............................................................................................  
6 
Figure 1.1. 
 DoD Mission Areas, Service Core Functions, Governance and Subportfolios.  ....  
7 
1.5. 
 Portfolio Management/Capital Planning and Investment Control Alignment with 
Corporate Structure Processes. ................................................................................  
7 
1.6. 
 Information Technology Investment Portfolio Suite (ITIPS).   ..............................  
8 
Chapter 2— ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES 
 
10 
2.1. 
 Chief, Information Dominance and Chief Information Officer, Office of the 
Secretary of the Air Force (SAF/CIO A6).  .............................................................  
10 
2.2. 
 Deputy Chief Management Officer & Office of Business Transformation 
(SAF/MG). ...............................................................................................................  
11 
2.3. 
 Assistant Secretary of the Air Force for Acquisition (SAF/AQ). ...........................  
11 
2.4. 
 Assistant Secretary of the Air Force, Financial Management and Comptroller 
(SAF/FM).................................................................................................................  
12 
2.5. 
 Deputy Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Surveillance and Reconnaissance 
(AF/A2).  ..................................................................................................................  
12 
AFI17-110  23 MAY 2018 
3 
2.6. 
 Chief, Information Dominance and Chief Information Officer, Office of the 
Secretary of the Air Force Cyberspace Capabilities and Compliance Directorate 
(SAF/CIO A6X). ......................................................................................................  
12 
2.7. 
 Information Technology Portfolio Owners. ............................................................  
13 
2.8. 
 Portfolio Managers. ................................................................................................  
14 
2.9. 
 Program Managers/Project Managers. ....................................................................  
15 
Attachment 1— GLOSSARY OF REFERENCES AND SUPPORTING INFORMATION 
 
17 
Attachment 2— WARFIGHTING MISSION AREA CATEGORIZATION CRITERIA 
AND RATIONALE 
 
25 
Attachment 3— BUSINESS MISSION AREA CATEGORIZATION CRITERIA AND 
RATIONALE 
 
26 
Attachment 4— INFORMATION ENVIRONMENT MISSION AREA 
CATEGORIZATION CRITERIA AND RATIONALE 
 
28 
Attachment 5— DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE MISSION AREA CATEGORIZATION 
CRITERIA AND RATIONALE 
 
29 
Attachment 6— CAPITAL PLANNING AND INVESTMENT CONTROL 
QUESTIONNAIRE 
 
30 
Attachment 7— AIR FORCE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY PORTFOLIO OWNER 
LIST 
 
33 
 
 
 
4 
AFI17-110  23 MAY 2018 
Chapter 1 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY PORTFOLIO MANAGEMENT AND CAPITAL 
PLANNING AND INVESTMENT CONTROL 
1.1.  Purpose and Overview of Information Technology Portfolio Management and Capital 
Planning and Investment Control. 
1.1.1.  In accordance with DoD Directive 8115.01, the Air Force uses Portfolio Management 
to control its Information Technology investments using the Mission Area structure as the 
common framework and lexicon for the organization of Information Technology portfolios. 
Information Technology Portfolio Management has three main goals:  maximize the value of 
the portfolio against the objectives of DoD; balance the portfolio against resource constraints; 
link the portfolio to strategy. An essential element of Portfolio Management is Capital 
Planning and Investment Control of Information Technology investments. Through Portfolio 
Management and proper Capital Planning and Investment Control, Information Technology 
investments deliver the most capability to Airmen to conduct operations across all Mission 
Areas. 
1.1.2.  This Instruction implements and establishes Air Force-wide guidance, roles and 
responsibilities for the Air Force’s Information Technology Portfolio Management and 
Capital Planning and Investment Control as follows: 
1.1.2.1.  Further defines Portfolio Management and Capital Planning and Investment 
Control and how these processes are accomplished through the DoD principal decision 
support and the Air Force corporate structure processes. 
1.1.2.2.  Assigns responsibilities for the management of Air Force Information 
Technology investments, including National Security Systems (in accordance with 
statutory requirements) and its associated resources as portfolios within the Air Force 
Enterprise that focus on improving Air Force and DoD capabilities and mission 
outcomes. 
1.1.2.3.  Provides fundamental concepts for managing a portfolio of Information 
Technology resources and defines processes for complying with external and internal 
statutory and regulatory requirements. 
1.1.2.4.  Establishes a management framework within the Air Force to develop and 
manage Information Technology portfolios by Mission Area at all levels in which the Air 
Force develops, manages, or funds Information Technology investments. 
1.1.2.5.  Provides guidance on how the content of these portfolios will be documented to 
support the Air Force Information Technology Portfolio Management and decision-
making processes in the Office of Information Dominance and Chief Information Officer 
in concert with DoD decision support and Air Force corporate structure processes. 
1.1.2.6.  Defines and clarifies requirements for identifying and registering Information 
Technology resources comprising an initiative (systems, programs, projects, 
organizations, and families of systems) within the Air Force Information Technology 
Investment Portfolio Suite (referred to as ITIPS). 
AFI17-110  23 MAY 2018 
5 
1.2.  Portfolio Management and Capital Planning and Investment Control Concepts. 
1.2.1.  Information Technology investments shall be managed as portfolios to ensure these 
investments support the Air Force’s vision, mission and goals; ensure efficient and effective 
delivery of capabilities to the warfighter; and maximize return on investment to the 
enterprise. All Information Technology investments must be approved through the 
appropriate DoD decision support and Air Force corporate structure process. Once approved, 
all Information Technology investments will be registered in ITIPS by the program or project 
manager with assistance provided by the Portfolio Manager (or an equivalent system for 
Special Access Programs). SAF/CIO A6 staff will initiate registration in DoD’s Information 
Technology Portfolio Repository (DITPR) system and upload to the Defense Information 
Technology Investment Portal (DITIP) to obtain a Select & Native Programming Data Input 
System for Information Technology (SNaP-IT) Unique Investment Identifier (for new 
investments only). 
1.2.2.  Information Technology Portfolios shall be grouped and integrated at the DoD 
Mission Area and Functional levels. Specifically, the portfolios are defined in their respective 
Mission Area - Warfighting Mission Area, Business Mission Area, Information Environment 
Mission Area and the Defense Intelligence Mission Area. Functional portfolios are defined 
by their Functional area such as logistics, personnel and training. Mission Area and 
Functional portfolios may be divided into subportfolios (e.g., domains) that represent 
common collections of related, or highly dependent, system capabilities and services. These 
portfolios/subportfolios are managed by the appropriate Portfolio Owners. Further 
information on the Mission Areas and their respective portfolios/subportfolios are described 
in section 1.4 Portfolio Governance. 
1.2.3.  Effective and efficient management of Information Technology Investment portfolios 
is a result of the complementary application of Capital Planning and Investment Control 
principles within the processes of Joint Capabilities Integration and Development System (if 
applicable investment value is met) & Defense Acquisition System, or Business Capability 
Acquisition Cycle and Planning, Programming, Budgeting and Execution processes as 
outlined in DoD Instruction 8115.02. Capital Planning and Investment Control enables the 
selection, control and evaluation for every Information Technology investment and renders a 
recommendation to reviewing boards for inclusion in the Air Force Organizational Execution 
Plans and/or Core Function Support Plans (note: the analysis activities of capital planning 
and investment control listed in DoD Instruction 8115.02 are covered in the selection 
activities of Attachment 6). Portfolio Owners and Managers (this term is hereafter used as 
all-inclusive of Mission Area portfolios, sub-portfolios and Functional portfolios) use the 
information gleaned from Capital Planning and Investment Control evaluations to better 
inform decisions on Information Technology systems and assess capability gaps within their 
portfolio. The execution of this process will encompass all DoD Mission Areas. 
1.3.  Portfolio Management and Capital Planning and Investment Control Objectives.  
1.3.1.  The overarching objective of Portfolio Management is to ensure Information 
Technology investment decisions take into account integration, coordination and 
synchronization of capability requirements to Information Technology investments. 
Additionally, Portfolio Management ensures that proper evaluation of the capability demand 
(both warfighting and non-warfighting) is balanced against resource constraints, risks are 
6 
AFI17-110  23 MAY 2018 
identified and assessed and possible trade-offs are identified to Air Force decision makers 
(SAF/CIO A6, Headquarters Air Force Functionals, Portfolio Owners). Other Portfolio 
Management objectives are as follows: 
1.3.1.1.  Demonstrate and document clear alignment of the Information Technology 
Portfolio to Air Force’s mission and business objectives and with the strategic and 
tactical goals specified in the Information Dominance Flight Plan and the Air Force 
Strategic Master Plan. 
1.3.1.2.  Ensure sufficient and appropriate business planning and justification in the 
selection and control of Air Force Information Technology investments. 
1.3.2.  Capital Planning and Investment Control, as a whole, integrates strategic planning, 
Enterprise Architecture, cybersecurity, budgeting, portfolio management, risk management 
and acquisition management of Information Technology investments. These factors are 
evaluated throughout the life cycle of an investment through selection, control and evaluation 
(see Attachment 1 for definitions).  Attachment 6 lists recommended questions during 
selection, control and evaluation that assist in ensuring a new Information Technology 
investment is tied to strategic guidance. These questions should be addressed by the Program 
Manager and/or project sponsor and reviewed by the Portfolio Manager, Portfolio Owners 
and by the appropriate interested SAF/CIO A6 directorates through the existing DoD 
decision support and Air Force corporate structure processes, reviews and documents. 
1.3.3.  The funding of investments within the portfolios is the result of the complementary 
application of Capital Planning and Investment Control principles within the Joint 
Capabilities Integration and Development System (requirements) and Defense Acquisition 
System (acquisition), or Business Capability Acquisition Cycle (requirements and acquisition 
for Defense Business Systems) and Planning, Programming, Budgeting and Execution 
(resourcing) processes as discussed in the sections that follow. 
1.4.  Portfolio Governance. 
1.4.1.  Portfolios of Information Technology investments must be managed using Capital 
Planning and Investment Control and will utilize, to the maximum extent possible, the DoD 
governance structure and key processes to address Mission Areas and their aligned 
Functional capability areas (see Figure 1.1). The primary DoD decision support processes are 
the processes of the Joint Capabilities Integration and Development System, Defense 
Acquisition System, Business Capability Acquisition Cycle and Planning, Programming, 
Budgeting and Execution. Figure 1.1 is a representation of the Mission Areas, the Air Force 
service core functions, DoD and Air Force governance and main subportfolios. 
AFI17-110  23 MAY 2018 
7 
Figure 1.1.  DoD Mission Areas, Service Core Functions, Governance and Subportfolios.  
 
1.4.2.  All Information Technology investments will be assessed annually using the 
Information Technology investment selection, control and evaluation reviews, depending on 
where in the life cycle an Information Technology investment is through DoD decision 
support processes and the governance structures described in this instruction. 
1.4.3.  All Information Technology investments must be aligned to Mission Areas and 
organized by the approved Mission Area guidance criteria. Upon initial registration in ITIPS 
(or an equivalent system for Special Access Programs), Portfolio and/or Program Managers 
will select a Mission Area (see Attachments 2-5 as guidance on selecting a Mission Area) 
based on their knowledge of proper alignment of the Information Technology investment. 
SAF/CIO A6 staff, will review input and make a recommendation on the Mission Area and 
validate it with the Mission Area Portfolio Owner as part of the registration review process. 
Further information on ITIPS can be found in section 1.6. 
1.4.4.  All Mission Areas and aligned Functional capability areas will be managed and 
governed using an integrated approach based on the Air Force Enterprise Architecture 
capability goals and objectives, principles, rules, activities, processes, services, standards and 
performance measures (reference Air Force Instruction 17-140, Air Force Architecting). 
1.4.5.  Special Access Program Information Systems must comply with this instruction 
unless they also handle Sensitive Compartmented Information material.  More restrictive 
Intelligence and Special Access Program policies and directives take precedence over this 
publication.  The latest version of all publications (e.g., Federal, Joint, DoD, Air Force) 
referenced within this publication must be used. 
1.5.  Portfolio Management/Capital Planning and Investment Control Alignment with 
Corporate Structure Processes. 
1.5.1.  The DoD decision support processes (reference paragraph 1.4.1) are conducted at the 
service level by the Air Force corporate structure (Air Force Requirements Oversight Board, 
Air Force Council and the Air Force Review Board). The Air Force’s Portfolio Management 
and Capital Planning and Investment Control must be aligned to DoD decision support 
processes, Air Force corporate structure processes and Air Force Enterprise Architecture to 
8 
AFI17-110  23 MAY 2018 
the maximum extent possible. By integrating Portfolio Management/Capital Planning and 
Investment Control into these existing processes, the Air Force is better able to make 
informed decisions on Information Technology investments as they are acquired, maintained 
and decommissioned. 
1.5.2.  With respect to assignment of a specific Information Technology investment to an 
organizational portfolio, the organization that plans and programs resources supporting the 
investment through the Planning, Programming, Budgeting and Execution cycle is 
responsible for performing Portfolio Management and Capital Planning and Investment 
Control activities throughout the lifecycle of the investment. Where multiple organizations 
plan and program resources to support a single Information Technology investment, the 
organization identified as lead command or that provides the largest percentage of funds, in 
the absence of a lead command, is responsible for performing Portfolio Management and 
Capital Planning and Investment Control activities for that investment. 
1.6.  Information Technology Investment Portfolio Suite (ITIPS).   
1.6.1.  The Information Technology Investment Portfolio Suite, referred to as ITIPS, is the 
Air Force’s enterprise authoritative source for Information Technology portfolio 
management and is used to report both Information Technology compliance and budget. For 
Information Technology compliance, these functions include processes for Information 
Technology Registration, Privacy Act, Federal Information Security Modernization Act, 
Clinger-Cohen Act, Paperwork Reduction Act, Records Management, Chief Financial 
Officer, Standard Financial Information Structure, Section 508 of the Rehabilitation Act, 
interoperability, infrastructure, information collections, National Defense Authorization Act, 
Business Enterprise Architecture, Business Process Reengineering, Enterprise Service 
Program/Project and Enterprise Technical Program/Project. For Information Technology 
budget reporting, ITIPS includes the Budget Estimate Submission and Presidential Budget 
activities. ITIPS supports data flow via an interface to the DoD’s Information Technology 
Portfolio Repository (DITPR) system. ITIPS also optimizes the information technology 
budget and compliance processes, enables automation to the fullest extent possible and 
provides robust analytical capabilities. 
1.6.2.  The ITIPS tool is utilized by all key stakeholders. Information Technology investment 
Program Managers utilize ITIPS to document compliance status and Information Technology 
Budget execution information for individual investments. Portfolio Owners and Managers 
utilize ITIPS to manage activities across their portfolio in regards to Capital Planning and 
Investment Control and Information Technology investment management processes. The 
SAF/CIO A6X staff utilizes the inherent data integration and analytics of ITIPS to simplify, 
improve and standardize portfolio management activities to deliver capabilities to Functional 
customers across the Air Force. The investment administrative stakeholders of Information 
Technology investments must have accounts in ITIPS in order to manage their programs 
and/or portfolios. 
1.6.3.  The newly formed Enterprise Information Technology (EIT) Council, Board, and 
Group as well as the Information Technology Governance Executive Board (ITGEB) and 
Group (ITGEG) perform portfolio and investment reviews using ITIPS to display and 
compare the statuses of Information Technology portfolios and investments in terms of cost, 
schedule, performance, budget, compliance, functionality and technology factors.  These 
AFI17-110  23 MAY 2018 
9 
activities support the Chief Information Officer’s statutory responsibilities, aid in the 
elimination of duplicative Information Technology systems and provide greater insight on 
investments allocated to functional capabilities across the Air Force. 
1.6.4.  All equipment, interconnected systems or subsystems of equipment as defined by this 
publication as Information Technology investments (see Attachment 1) must be reported in 
ITIPS so that they can be reported in the Information Technology budget. Exceptions to 
reporting Information Technology investments are defined in accordance with the DoD 
Financial Management Regulation, 7000.14R, Volume 2B, Chapter 18, paragraph 180102.D. 
Specific guidance for data entry into ITIPS is distributed to the field each budget cycle from 
SAF/CIO A6X, Information Technology Budget Branch. 
 
 
10 
AFI17-110  23 MAY 2018 
Chapter 2 
ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES 
2.1.  Chief, Information Dominance and Chief Information Officer, Office of the Secretary 
of the Air Force (SAF/CIO A6).   SAF/CIO A6 conducts Portfolio Management and Capital 
Planning and Investment Control through the DoD decision support processes and the Chief 
Information Officer internal corporate processes. The internal processes are managed through the 
Information Technology governance forums of the Enterprise Information Technology (EIT) 
Council, Board, and Group as well as the Information Technology Executive Board and Group 
(ITGEB & ITGEG).  Externally, the SAF/CIO A6 utilizes their role in the Defense Business 
Council, the Enterprise Senior Working Group (ESWG), the Capabilities Development Council 
(CDC) and the Capabilities Development Working Group (CDWG) to further conduct portfolio 
management. The SAF/CIO A6, through its directorates and internal corporate processes, shall: 
2.1.1.  Review the performance of the Air Force Information Technology portfolios and 
National Security Systems programs. Provide recommendations on the continuation, 
modification, or termination of cyberspace, Information Technology and/or National Security 
Systems programs or projects pursuant to 40 USC § 11315, 44 USC § 3506, 44 USC § 3541, 
et seq. (the Federal Information Security Management Act of 2002), 44 USC § 3603 and 
other applicable authorities. These reviews will, at a minimum, be conducted annually.  (T-0) 
2.1.2.  Advocate for Air Force Information Technology interests as a co-principal 
representative with SAF/MG in the Defense Business Council for Defense Business System, 
and at the Enterprise Senior Working Group. 
2.1.3.  Serve as Department of the Air Force cyberspace/Information Technology Portfolio 
Manager in coordination with the operational, functional and resource management 
stakeholders. 
2.1.4.  Serve a voting member on the Capabilities Development Council and inform members 
of Portfolio Management/Capital Planning and Investment Control decisions or issues. 
2.1.5.  Establish and maintain Portfolio Management/Capital Planning and Investment 
Control standards for Information Technology compliance. Approve and manage 
performance metrics to measure progress and review metrics to continually assess current 
Information Technology investment performance. 
2.1.6.  Manage and set the Investment Review Panel battle rhythm. 
2.1.7.  Review and evaluate risk profile (see Air Force Instruction 17-101, Risk Management 
Framework (RMF) for Air Force Information Technology, paragraph 2.6.10 and A6.1.2.16 
for general guidance on risk evaluations). 
2.1.8.  Establish a schedule (battle rhythm) to review all Mission Area Information 
Technology portfolios (and/or investments as needed) annually to evaluate the following: 
2.1.8.1.  Strategic alignment of planning, acquisition, development, implementation, 
operations and maintenance of Air Force information system investments (and 
corresponding budgets) that best support the Information Dominance Flight Plan and 
overall Air Force strategic goals. 
AFI17-110  23 MAY 2018 
11 
2.1.8.2.  Information Technology investment risk. 
2.1.8.3.  Performance measures/metrics of existing Information Technology investments 
and existing initiatives to develop a recommendation to the DoD decision support and Air 
Force corporate structure on selection, control or termination. 
2.1.8.4.  Information Dominance initiatives and investments within the Enterprise 
Information Technology portfolio. 
2.2.  Deputy Chief Management Officer & Office of Business Transformation 
(SAF/MG).  SAF/MG shall: 
2.2.1.  Ensure defense business systems accountability and modernization in compliance with 
10 USC § 2222. (T-0) 
2.2.2.  Chair and provide the secretariat functions for the Enterprise Senior Working Group.  
This working group provides oversight for data systems within the Air Force Business 
Mission Area in coordination with SAF/CIO A6’s governance forums to ensure Information 
Technology investment planning and control is consistent with DoD and Air Force strategic 
plans and guidance. 
2.2.3.  Ensure data systems within Air Force Business Mission Area are enabled by sufficient 
business process reengineering and executable Doctrine, Organization, Training, Materiel, 
Logistics, Personnel and Facilities actions during development & modernization activities. 
2.2.4.  Coordinate the Air Force Business Mission Area roadmap with SAF/CIO A6 
governance forums for transitioning business systems into the Joint Information 
Environment. 
2.2.5.  Serve as the approval authority for the certification of funds and Air Force business 
capabilities requirements development in the Business Capability Acquisition Cycle Solution 
Analysis and Functional Requirements Authority to Proceeds per DoD Instruction 5000.75. 
2.3.  Assistant Secretary of the Air Force for Acquisition (SAF/AQ).  SAF/AQ shall: 
2.3.1.  Participate in Information Technology governance forums. 
2.3.2.  Work with SAF/CIO A6 to ensure Air Force cyber acquisition programs are consistent 
with the Information Dominance Flight Plan and the Air Force Enterprise Architecture 
developed by SAF/CIO A6. 
2.3.3.  Ensure the execution of Air Force acquisition and sustainment programs appropriately 
implements cyberspace and warfighting integration requirements, including, interoperability, 
reusability of application designs and promoting the adoption of Information Technology as 
common services and the Air Force common computing environment. These requirements 
will be implemented in accordance with Air Force Instruction 63-101/20-101, Integrated Life 
Cycle Management. 
2.3.4.  Ensure the acquisition program office Program Manager is responsible for 
cybersecurity of the weapon system, to include Information Technology interfaces and 
embedded computer hardware and software and has allocated sufficient resources to 
cybersecurity. 
12 
AFI17-110  23 MAY 2018 
2.3.5.  Ensure all acquisition programs plan and conduct robust developmental and 
operational cyber testing prior to system deployment including those required to demonstrate 
compliance with cybersecurity requirements established for the program to be authorized to 
operate. 
2.3.6.  Designate DoD/Air Force information systems that the Air Force Service Acquisition 
Executive has determined are critical to the direct fulfillment of military or intelligence 
missions as "applicable systems" in accordance with DoD Instruction 5200.44, Protection of 
Mission Critical Functions to Achieve Trusted Systems and Networks. (T-0) 
2.4.  Assistant Secretary of the Air Force, Financial Management and Comptroller 
(SAF/FM).  SAF/FM shall: 
2.4.1.  Coordinate, as required, on business case analysis and/or economic analysis 
supporting cyberspace requirements. 
2.4.2.  In accordance with 10 USC § 8022, approve and supervise all financial cyberspace 
programs to ensure compliance with finance and accounting standards. (T-0) 
2.4.3.  Participate in Information Technology governance forums. 
2.5.  Deputy 
Chief 
of 
Staff 
for 
Intelligence, 
Surveillance 
and 
Reconnaissance 
(AF/A2).   AF/A2 shall: 
2.5.1.  Advocate for a prioritized integration of battlespace awareness warfighting systems 
and intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance enterprise interoperability under the 
warfighting integration governance forums and with other appropriate forums as needed. 
2.5.2.  Participate in Information Technology governance forums. 
2.5.3.  Conduct review of Defense Intelligence capabilities and investments, including all 
Defense Intelligence Mission Area and those Intelligence, Surveillance and Reconnaissance 
systems aligned within Battlespace Awareness and Command, Control, Communications and 
Computers Intelligence, Surveillance and Reconnaissance. 
2.5.4.  Identify opportunities to share capabilities and investment between Defense 
Intelligence Mission Area and the other Mission Areas. 
2.5.5.  Ensure Air Force Defense Intelligence Mission Area portfolios properly implement 
Intelligence Community Directive 121, Managing the Intelligence Community Information 
Environment and Intelligence Community Directive 503, Intelligence Community 
Information Systems Security Risk Management. (T-0) 
2.6.  Chief, Information Dominance and Chief Information Officer, Office of the Secretary 
of the Air Force Cyberspace Capabilities and Compliance Directorate (SAF/CIO 
A6X).  The SAF/CIO A6X shall:  
2.6.1.  Establish and maintain a coherent cyberspace/Information Technology Portfolio 
Management/Capital Planning and Investment Control management process for integrated, 
efficient and effective allocation of resources on Information Technology investments. 
2.6.2.  Publish standardized Portfolio Management/Capital Planning and Investment Control 
compliance guidance for all stakeholders. 
AFI17-110  23 MAY 2018 
13 
2.6.3.  Ensure the cyberspace/Information Technology Capital Planning and Investment 
Management process is integrated with planning, programming, budgeting, financial, 
strategic sourcing and program management processes. 
2.6.4.  Review Air Force budget requests for cyberspace/Information Technology and 
National Security Systems pursuant to 10 USC § 2223 and develop a full and accurate 
accounting (in coordination with SAF/FM) of Information Technology expenditures, related 
expenditures and results pursuant to 44 USC § 3506 and 40 USC § 11315. (T-0) 
2.6.5.  Ensure cyberspace/Information Technology investments are aligned with Air Force 
strategy and capability delivery in coordination with the operational and resource 
management stakeholders, as well as with all applicable laws, policies and regulations. 
2.6.6.  Ensure the elimination of duplicate cyberspace/Information Technology and National 
Security Systems within Air Force Information Technology portfolios. 
2.6.7.  Ensure Information Technology investments are properly registered into the 
Information Technology data repository ITIPS. 
2.6.8.  Serve as a voting member on the Capabilities Development Working Group, 
informing the other members of Portfolio Management/Capital Planning and Investment 
Control decisions/issues. Inform the Capabilities Development Council of Portfolio 
Management/Capital Planning and Investment Control decisions/issues. 
2.6.9.  Monitor and report information technology compliance (see paragraph 1.6.1.) with 
statutory and mandated requirements. 
2.7.  Information Technology Portfolio Owners.  Portfolio Owners currently consist of 
MAJCOM/Core Function Leads, Headquarters Air Force and Secretariat of the Air Force staffs, 
and certain Combatant Command staffs that have Air Force Information Technology 
investments. With the stand-up of the Air Force Warfighting Integration Capability portfolio 
ownership responsibilities will transfer to the appointed Lead Command/Agency. A full list of 
current Portfolio Owners is listed in Attachment 7. The Information Technology Portfolio 
Owners shall: 
2.7.1.  Adhere to SAF/CIO A6 Portfolio Management/Capital Planning and Investment 
Control guidance in order to ensure uniformity in Capital Planning and Investment Control 
reporting. 
2.7.2.  Assign Portfolio Managers for portfolios within their control via appointment letter. 
2.7.3.  Assign Program and/or Project Managers via appointment letter for non-Program 
Executive Officer appointed Information Technology investment activities within their 
portfolio. 
2.7.4.  Validate that portfolio(s) provide DoD and Air Force mission capability and aligns 
with DoD and Air Force strategy, operational goals, Mission Areas and Functional capability 
areas. 
2.7.5.  Maintain a 12-month forecast of upcoming requirement and/or acquisition events for 
all programs in their portfolio. 
2.7.6.  Perform risk assessments for all programs within their portfolio in support of the Joint 
Capabilities Integration and Development System, Business Capability Acquisition Cycle or 
14 
AFI17-110  23 MAY 2018 
Defense Acquisition System and Planning, Programming, Budgeting and Execution 
processes (DoD decision support processes). 
2.7.7.  Provide operational analyses of Information Technology investments to determine 
whether investments meet/maintain expected outcome, performance, return on investment 
and cost effectiveness. 
2.7.8.  Actively participate in DoD decision support processes as appropriate and integrate 
Portfolio Management/Capital Planning and Investment Control criteria as listed 
(interoperability, cybersecurity, Enterprise Architecture, strategy alignment, risk, Clinger-
Cohen Act compliance, etc. see Attachment 6) into corporate process deliverables. 
2.7.9.  Conduct Post Implementation Reviews in accordance with Air Force Manual 17-1402, 
Air Force Clinger-Cohen Act (CCA) Compliance Guide. 
2.7.10.  Ensure Doctrine, Organization, Training, materiel, Leadership, Personnel and 
Facilities factors and/or options are considered through the acquisition process prior to 
proceeding with a materiel solution. 
2.7.11.  Work with Portfolio Managers to develop an effective Information Technology 
management program. 
2.7.12.  Track Business Mission Area system Organizational Execution Plan information for 
certification (if applicable). 
2.7.13.  Track Organizational Execution Plans certified programs and milestones to ensure 
expected benefits and outcomes are realized (if applicable). 
2.7.14.  Perform annual review of Information Technology investment information for 
accuracy and completeness. 
2.7.15.  Conduct annual Capital Planning and Investment Control reviews (see Attachment 6) 
of all Information Technology systems encompassed in their portfolio and ensure. 
2.7.16.  Ensure portfolio manager billets are properly coded as Information Technology level 
one acquisition professionals (at a minimum). 
2.7.17.  Track Information Technology compliance status for all investments in their 
portfolio. 
2.7.18.  Ensure Program Managers are advised of National Defense Authorization Act 
certification and Information Technology compliance requirements and are notified of 
requirement changes in the portfolio. 
2.8.  Portfolio Managers.  The Portfolio Manager shall: 
2.8.1.  Serve as the advisor to a Program Manager and/or Project manager (if established). 
2.8.2.  Acquire Information Technology acquisition professional level one certification (at a 
minimum) through Defense Acquisition University and be familiar with the DoD budgeting 
process in order to perform Portfolio Management duties. 
2.8.3.  Actively participate in DoD decision support processes as appropriate and integrate 
Portfolio Management/Capital Planning and Investment Control criteria as listed in section 
AFI17-110  23 MAY 2018 
15 
1.3 and Attachment 6 into requirement, acquisition and budgeting deliverables (as 
applicable). 
2.8.4.  Support the Portfolio Owner to ensure Information Technology Investments align to 
business strategy and objectives and support the elimination of duplicative investments. 
2.8.5.  Provide, at a minimum, an annual report on the overall health of the portfolio 
(compliance, performance, cybersecurity, funding, integration, traceability to Information 
Dominance Flight Plan and other areas addressed in Attachment 6) to the Portfolio Owner 
and Information Technology governance forums to support Capital Planning and Investment 
Control reviews. 
2.8.6.  Manage all Information Technology investments and compliance and financial data in 
accordance with SAF/CIO A6 and Information Technology governance forum directives 
within ITIPS. 
2.8.7.  Track Information Technology compliance status for all systems in their portfolio. 
2.8.8.  Annually review portfolio data within ITIPS for accuracy and completeness. 
2.8.9.  Assist the Portfolio Owner to ensure Doctrine, Organization, Training, materiel, 
Leadership, Personnel and Facilities factors and/or options are considered through the 
acquisition process prior to proceeding with a materiel solution. 
2.8.10.  Adhere to SAF/CIO A6 and Air Force Warfighting Integration Capability/MAJCOM 
Portfolio Management and Capital Planning and Investment Control guidance in order to 
ensure uniformity in Capital Planning and Investment Control reporting. 
2.9.  Program Managers/Project Managers.  Since many Information Technology investments 
may not be acquired through a formally established program, the responsibilities of the Program 
Manager and Project Manager are grouped together. The Program and Project Managers shall: 
2.9.1.  Except for programs of record, prepare Information Technology business cases (see 
Attachment 6) and manage Information Technology investments in accordance with 
guidance from SAF/CIO A6 and associated best practices. For programs of record, Program 
Managers will conduct a business case analysis in accordance with Air Force Instruction 63-
101/20-101. 
2.9.2.  For development, modernization, or enhancement projects, or those in mixed life 
cycle, use an appropriately compliant American National Standards Institute Standard 748 
earned value management system to collect government earned value data and merge that 
data with the contractor’s earned value data for a full picture of the Information Technology 
investment performance when applicable. For programs of record, earned value management 
(where required) will be addressed by the Program Manager per DoD Instruction 5000.02 or 
5000.75. 
2.9.3.  For programs of record, perform an Integrated Baseline Review in accordance with 
DoD Instruction 5000.02 or 5000.75 requirements. 
2.9.4.  Conduct periodic Compliance and Surveillance Reviews to ensure the contractor’s 
earned value management system is appropriately compliant with Electronic Industries 
Alliance 748 criteria and follows its guidelines. For programs of record, Compliance and 
16 
AFI17-110  23 MAY 2018 
Surveillance Reviews will be addressed by the Program Manager per DoD Instruction 
5000.02 or 5000.75.  
2.9.5.  Actively participate in DoD decision support processes as appropriate and integrate 
Portfolio Management/Capital Planning and Investment Control criteria as listed in section 
1.3 and Attachment 6 into deliverables. For programs of record, all criteria will be addressed 
by the Program Manager per DoD Instruction 5000.02 or 5000.75. 
2.9.6.  Provide surveillance of contractors to ensure they are planning and controlling 
investment activities and providing timely and accurate reports.  For programs of record, all 
contractor supervision will be addressed by the Program Manager per DoD Instruction 
5000.02 or 5000.75. 
2.9.7.  Monitor the project to determine if assets are performing within baseline cost and are 
projected to meet schedule and performance goals.  For programs of record, operational 
analyses will be addressed with an acquisition strategy by the Program Manager per DoD 
Instruction 5000.02 or 5000.75. 
2.9.8.  Register and enter applicable Information Technology investment, compliance and 
financial data in accordance with SAF/CIO A6 and Information Technology governance 
forum directives into ITIPS. 
2.9.9.  Generate information necessary to support the Air Force Organizational Execution 
Plans (for Business Mission Area systems). 
2.9.10.  Perform an annual review of Information Technology investment submissions in 
ITIPS for accuracy and completeness. 
 
BRADFORD J.SHWEDO, Lt Gen, USAF 
Chief, Information Dominance 
and Chief Information Officer 
AFI17-110  23 MAY 2018 
17 
Attachment 1 
GLOSSARY OF REFERENCES AND SUPPORTING INFORMATION 
References 
AF/A5R, Requirements Development Guidebook, Vol 1 & Vol 2, September 19, 2016 
AFI 17-101, Risk Management Framework (RMF) for Air Force IT, February 2, 2017 
AFI 17-140, Air Force Architecting, November 2, 2017 
AFI 33-360, Publications and Forms Management, December 1, 2015 
AFI 63-101/20-101, Integrated Life Cycle Management, May 9, 2017 
AFI 65-509, Business Case Analysis, September 19, 2011 
AFI 99-103, Capabilities-Based Test and Evaluation, April 6, 2017 
AFMAN 17-1402, Air Force Clinger-Cohen Act (CCA) Compliance Guide, October 24, 2012 
AFMAN 33-363, Management of Records, June 2, 2017 
AFMAN 63-144, Defense Business System Life Cycle Management, March 31, 2016 
AFPD 10-6, Capability Requirements Development, November 6, 2013 
AFPD 10-9, Lead Command Designation and Responsibilities for Weapon Systems, March 8, 
2007 
AFPD 17-1, Information Dominance Governance and Management, April 12, 2016 
AFPD 17-2, Cyberspace Operations, April 12, 2016 
American National Standards Institute/Electronic Industries Alliance 748, March 2013 
CJCSI 3100.01C, Joint Strategic Planning System, November 20, 2015 
CJCSI 3170.01I, Joint Capabilities Integration and Development System, January 23, 2015 
CJCSI 5123.01G, Charter of the Joint Requirements Oversight Council, February 12, 2015 
DoD Information Technology Portfolio Repository User’s Guide, June 2011 
DoDD 5000.01, The Defense Acquisition System, November 20, 2007 
DoDD 5144.02, DOD Chief Information Officer (DOD CIO), November 21, 2014 
DoDD 5200.43, Management of the Defense Security Enterprise, August 15, 2017 
DoDD 7045.14, The Planning, Programming, Budgeting and Execution (PPBE) Process, 
January 25, 2013 
DoDD 8000.01, Management of the Department of Defense Information Enterprise, March 17, 
2016 
DoDD 8115.01, Information Technology Portfolio Management, October 10, 2005 
DoD FMR, 7000.14R Volume 2B, Department of Defense Financial Management Regulation, 
December 2016 
18 
AFI17-110  23 MAY 2018 
DoDI 5000.02, Operation of the Defense Acquisition System, January 7, 2015 incorporating 
change 1 January 26, 2017 
DoDI 5000.74, Defense Acquisition of Services, January 5, 2016, Incorporating Change 1, 
October 5, 2017 
DoDI 5000.75, Business Systems Requirements and Acquisition, February 2, 2017 
DoDI 8115.02, Information Technology Portfolio Management Implementation, October 30, 
2006 
DoDI 8500.01, Cybersecurity, March 14, 2014 
GAO Executive Guide, GAO-04-394G, Information Technology Investment Management: A 
Framework for Assessing and Improving Process Maturity, March, 2004 
HAF MD 1-26, Chief, Information Dominance and Chief Information Officer, February 5, 2015 
JP 3-13, Information Operations, November 27, 2012 incorporating Change 1 November 20, 
2014 
OMB Circular A-130, Management of Federal Information Resources, July 27, 2016 
OMB Memorandum M-11-29, Chief Information Officer Authorities, August 8, 2011 
United States Code Title 40 Chapter 25 Subchapter 1 Part D Section 1452 
United States Code Title 40 Subtitle III Chapter 113 Subchapter 2 
United States Code Title 44 Chapter 35 Subchapter 1 Section 3506 
Adopted Forms 
Air Force Form 847, Recommendation for Change of Publication 
Air Force Form 1067, Modification Proposal 
Abbreviations and Acronyms 
AFI—Air Force Instruction 
AFMAN—Air Force Manual 
CIO—Chief Information Officer 
CDC—Capabilities Development Council 
CDWG—Capabilities Development Working Group 
CJCS—Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff 
DITIP—Defense Information Technology Investment Portal 
DITPR—DoD’s Information Technology Portfolio Repository 
DoD—Department of Defense 
EIT—Enterprise Information Technology 
ESWG—Enterprise Senior Working Group 
AFI17-110  23 MAY 2018 
19 
HAF—Headquarters Air Force 
IT—Information Technology 
ITGEB—Information Technology Governance Executive Board 
ITGEG—Information Technology Governance Executive Group 
ITIPS—Information Technology Investment Portfolio Suite 
MAJCOM—Major Command 
MD—Mission Directive 
OMB—Office of Management and Budget 
OPR—Office of Primary Responsibility 
PPBE—Planning, Programming, Budgeting and Execution 
SAF—Secretariat of the Air Force 
SAF/AQ—Assistant Secretary of the Air Force for Acquisition 
SAF/CIO A6—Chief of Information Dominance and Chief Information Officer 
SAF/CIO A6X—Director of Cyberspace Capabilities and Compliance 
SAF/FM—Assistant Secretary of the Air Force, Financial Management and Comptroller 
SAF/MG—Director of Business Transformation and Deputy Chief Management Officer 
SNaP-IT—Select & Native Programming Data Input System for Information Technology 
Terms 
Business Case Analysis—(Air Force Instruction 65-509) A business case analysis, also referred 
to as a business case or business plan, is a decision support document that identifies alternatives 
and presents business, economic, risk, and technical arguments for selecting an alternative to 
achieve organizational or functional missions or goals. Business case analyses do not replace the 
judgment of the decision maker, but rather aid that judgment by considering possible 
alternatives, their costs, benefits, and risks, and the degree to which they meet program 
objectives, or are either within budget constraints or require additional funding. 
Business Mission Area—(DoD Instruction 8115.02) Ensures that the right capabilities, 
resources and materiel are reliably delivered to warfighters including: what they need, where 
they need it, when they need it, anywhere in the world.  In order to cost-effectively meet these 
requirements, the DoD current business and financial management infrastructure - processes, 
systems and data standards - are being transformed to ensure better support to the warfighter and 
improve accountability to the taxpayer. 
Capital Planning and Investment Control—Capital Planning and Investment Control is an 
integrated management process within Portfolio Management for the continuous selection, 
control and evaluation of Information Technology investments over their life cycles and is 
focused on achieving desired outcomes in support of the Air Force’s missions, goals and 
objectives. According to 40 USC § 11312, Capital Planning and Investment Control should 
“maximize the value and assess and manage the risks, of…information technology acquisition.” 
20 
AFI17-110  23 MAY 2018 
The program should “provide for the selection of information technology investments… 
management… and evaluation of the results of the investments.” It should also “be integrated 
with the processes for making budget, financial and program management decisions” already in 
place within the agency. 
Control—Control, per DoD Instruction 8115.02, is “the activity focused on acquiring the 
capabilities selected for the portfolio. It consists of acquisition and oversight activities at the 
portfolio level that complement and supplement traditional single-system, single-platform 
acquisition and oversight activities.” 
Cybersecurity—As stated in Committee on National Security Systems Instruction 4009, the 
ability to protect or defend the use of cyberspace from cyber-attacks. 
Cyberspace—A global domain within the information environment consisting of the 
interdependent network of information technology infrastructures and resident data, including 
the Internet, telecommunications networks, computer systems and embedded processors and 
controllers. (Joint Pub 3-12) NOTE: synonymous with cyber when used as an adjective. 
Defense Business System—(DoD Instruction 5000.75) Defense Business Systems are 
information systems that are operated by, for, or on behalf of the DoD, including: financial 
systems, financial data feeder systems, contracting systems, logistics systems, planning and 
budgeting systems, installations management systems, human resources management systems 
and training and readiness systems. A defense business system does not include a national 
security system or an information system used exclusively by and within the defense commissary 
system or the exchange system or other instrumentality of the DoD conducted for the morale, 
welfare and recreation of members of the armed forces using non-appropriated funds. 
Defense Information Technology Investment Portal (DITIP)—Defense Information 
Technology Investment Portal is a DoD enterprise service providing a centralized location for all 
Information Technology Investment data and includes the capability to initiate, modify and retire 
Information Technology investments. The Defense Information Technology Investment Portal 
supports data requirements for the DoD Information Technology budget submission, Defense 
Business System investment review process, Information Technology systems inventory and 
future DoD Information Technology data requirements. 
DoD’s Information Technology Portfolio Repository (DITPR)—(DITPR Guidance) DoD’s 
Information Technology Portfolio Repository is the Department’s consolidated inventory of 
Information Technology systems. It provides comprehensive unclassified inventory of mission 
critical and mission essential DoD information systems as required by 10 USC 2223(a)(5) and 
DoDD 5144.02.  The system contains information regarding DoD information systems required 
to be registered.  This includes information such as system names, acronyms, descriptions, 
sponsoring component, approval authority, points of contact, and other basic information 
required for any analysis of Departmental inventory, portfolios, or capabilities. 
Defense Intelligence Mission Area—(DoD Instruction 8115.02) Includes Information 
Technology investments within the Military Intelligence Program. The Under Secretary of 
Defense for Intelligence has delegated responsibility for managing the Defense Intelligence 
Mission Area portfolio to the Director, Defense Intelligence Agency, but the Under Secretary of 
Defense for Intelligence retains final signature authority. Defense Intelligence Mission Area 
AFI17-110  23 MAY 2018 
21 
management will require coordination of issues among portfolios that extend beyond the 
Department of Defense to the overall Intelligence Community. 
Evaluation—Evaluation, per DoD Instruction 8115.02, is the activity focused on measuring and 
assessing the outcomes of portfolio investments to determine whether expected benefits were 
achieved. Primary mechanisms for evaluation are Post Implementation Reviews and other 
operational assessments (e.g., after-action reports from military exercises). Evaluation results 
feed back into the other activities of Information Technology Portfolio Management to guide all 
investment decisions and recommendations. 
Future Years Defense Program—The 5-year program and financial plan for the DoD, as 
approved by the Secretary of Defense and presented to Congress with the Presidential budget. 
Information Environment—(Joint Publication 3-13) The aggregate of individuals, 
organizations and systems that collect, process, disseminate, or act on information.  The 
information environment, which includes cyberspace, consists of three interrelated dimensions 
that continuously interact with individuals, organizations and systems.  These dimensions are the 
physical, informational and cognitive, in accordance with Joint Publication 1-02 and Joint 
Publication 3-13. 
Information Environment Mission Area—(DoD Instruction 8115.02) Represents, the 
common, integrated information computing and communications environment of the DoD 
Information Network (DoDIN). The Information Environment is composed of DoD Information 
Network assets that operate as, provide transport for and/or assure local area networks, 
metropolitan area networks and wide area networks. The Information Environment includes 
computing infrastructure for the automatic acquisition, storage, manipulation, management, 
movement, control, display, switching, interchange, transmission, or reception of data or 
information, with primary emphasis on DoD enterprise hardware, software operating systems 
and hardware/software support that enable the DoD Information Network enterprise. The 
Information Environment also includes a common set of enterprise services, which provide 
awareness of, access to and delivery of information to the DoD Information Network. 
Information System—(DoD Directive 8000.01) A discrete set of information resources 
organized for the collection, processing, maintenance, use, sharing, dissemination, or disposition 
of information. 
Information Technology (IT)—In accordance with Office of Management and Budget Circular 
A-130 and DoD Directive 8000.01, Management of the Department of Defense Information 
Enterprise, the term "information technology" is defined as “any services or equipment, or 
interconnected system or subsystem of equipment used in the automatic acquisition, storage, 
manipulation, management, movement, control, display, switching, interchange, transmission, or 
reception of data or information by the executive agency. This includes if the equipment is used 
by the executive agency directly or is used by a contractor under a contract with the executive 
agency that requires the use of that equipment; or contractor use of that equipment to a 
significant extent in the performance of a service or the furnishing of a product to the executive 
agency. Information Technology includes computers, ancillary equipment, software, firmware 
and similar procedures, services (including support services) and related resources, but does not 
include any equipment acquired by a federal contractor incidental to a federal contract.” 
22 
AFI17-110  23 MAY 2018 
Initiative—A collection of resources focused on a single Information Technology project. 
Initiatives include both new starts and ongoing efforts and that a single initiative, in the 
Information Technology budget reporting construct, may equate to a program/project (either 
acquisition or sustainment/legacy), a collection of related programs/projects, or a collection of 
related programs and activities focused on Information Technology. 
Intelligence Planning, Programming, Budgeting and Execution—The process for National 
Intelligence, Surveillance and Reconnaissance Information Technology investments through 
Director of National Intelligence. 
Information Technology Investment—An information technology investment per DoD 
Directive 8000.01, “may include a project or projects for the development, modernization, 
enhancement, or maintenance of a single Information Technology asset or group of Information 
Technology assets with related functionality and the subsequent operation of those assets in a 
production environment.” All Information Technology investments should have a defined life 
cycle with start and end dates, with the end date representing the end of the currently estimated 
useful life of the investment, consistent with the investment's most current alternatives analysis if 
applicable. Information Technology investments include Platform Information Technology. 
Information Technology Portfolio—Per DoD Directive 8115.01, an Information Technology 
portfolio is defined as a grouping of Information Technology investments by capability to 
accomplish a specific Functional goal, objective, or mission outcome. 
Information Technology Services—(DoDI 5000.74) The performance of any work related to 
Information Technology and the operation of Information Technology, including National 
Security Systems. This includes outsourced Information Technology-based business processes, 
outsourced Information Technology and outsourced information functions. 
Joint Capabilities Integration and Development System—(CJCSI 3170.01I) A Chairman of 
the Joint Chiefs of Staff process identifying, assessing, validating and prioritizing joint military 
capability requirements. The Joint Capabilities Integration and Development System process is a 
collaborative effort which uses joint concepts and DoD architectures to identify prioritized 
capability gaps and integrated Doctrine, Organization, Training, materiel, Leadership and 
Education, Personnel, Facilities-Policy solutions (materiel and non-materiel) to resolve those 
gaps. 
Mission Area—(DoD Directive 8115.01) Defined areas of responsibility with functions, 
processes and capabilities that contribute to mission accomplishment. 
National Security Systems (NSS)—National Security Systems, as defined in Title 44 USC 3552 
(Reference (aw)), are telecommunications or information systems operated by or on behalf of the 
Federal Government, the function, operation, or use of which involves intelligence activities, 
cryptologic activities related to national security, command and control of military forces, 
equipment that is an integral part of a weapon or weapons system, or, is critical to the direct 
fulfillment of military or intelligence missions. National Security Systems do not include 
systems that are used for routine administrative and business applications (including payroll, 
finance and personnel management applications). 
Platform Information Technology—AFPD 17-2 defines platform information technology as “a 
special purpose system which employs computing resources (e.g., hardware, firmware and 
optionally software) that are physically embedded in, dedicated to, or essential in real time to the 
AFI17-110  23 MAY 2018 
23 
mission performance. It only performs (i.e., is dedicated to) the information processing assigned 
to it by its hosting special purpose system (this is not for core services).” 
Portfolio Management—(DoD Instruction 8115.02) The management of selected groupings of 
Information Technology investments using strategic planning, architectures and outcome-based 
performance measures to achieve a mission capability.  The outcome-based performance 
measures are addressed through meeting Capital Planning and Investment Control execution 
requirements. 
Program Objective Memorandum—The final product of the programming process within the 
DoD, the DoD Component’s Program Objective Memorandum displays the resource allocation 
decisions of the Military Departments in response to and in accordance with planning and 
programming guidance. 
Program of Record—1) Program as recorded in the current Future Years Defense Program or 
as updated from the last Future Years Defense Program by approved program documentation 
(e.g., Acquisition Program Baseline (APB), acquisition strategy, or Selected Acquisition Report 
(SAR)). If program documentation conflicts with latest Future Years Defense Program, the 
Future Years Defense Program takes priority. 2) May also refer to a program having successfully 
achieved formal program initiation, normally Milestone B. 
Program Budget Review—The Program Budget Review is an annual review coordinated by the 
Office of the Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller) (USD(C)) and Office of the Secretary of 
Defense CAPE to facilitate consolidation of program objective memorandums and Budget 
Estimate Submissions from the Services and other DoD Components and adjudication of any 
outstanding issues before presenting the overall DoD Program Objective Memorandum/Budget 
Estimate Submission input to the Presidential budget submission.  The Program Budget Review 
provides key opportunity to ensure that budgetary decisions are fully informed by the priorities 
of the validated capability requirements of the Joint Force. 
Selection—Selection is the activity that identifies the best mix of investments within available 
resources to meet integrated enterprise, Mission Area, subportfolio and Air Force strategic goals. 
Portfolio selection decisions are made using integrated architectures, transition plans, technical 
criteria and programmatic trade-offs to satisfy performance measures and achieve desired 
outcomes. 
Select & Native Programming Data Input System for Information Technology (SNaP-IT)—
is the authoritative database application used by the DoD Chief Information Officer to collect, 
coordinate, publish and disseminate the DoD Information Technology Budget and DoD 
Cyberspace Operations Budget to meet requirements established by the Congress and the Office 
of Management and Budget. 
Sponsor (Joint Capabilities Integration and Development System)—Per the Air Force 
Requirements Development Guidebook Vol 1, 19 Sep 2016, sponsors are the ones who lead the 
actual development of operational capability requirements and associated documentation for 
their assigned systems, programs, functions and/or missions. This is typically the Lead 
Command (or equivalent) for the mission area or program. Sponsors must use formal 
capabilities‐based processes to identify, evaluate, develop, field and sustain capabilities that 
compete for limited resources. The intent of these processes is to facilitate timely development of 
24 
AFI17-110  23 MAY 2018 
affordable and sustainable operational systems needed by warfighters and combatant 
commanders. Specific Sponsor roles and responsibilities are detailed in AFPD 10‐6. 
Warfighting Mission Area—(DoD Instruction 8115.02) The Warfighting Mission Area 
provides life cycle oversight to applicable DoD Component and Combatant Commander 
Information Technology investments (programs, systems and initiatives). Warfighting Mission 
Area Information Technology investments support and enhance the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs 
of Staff’s joint warfighting priorities while supporting actions to create a net-centric distributed 
force, capable of full spectrum dominance through decision and information superiority. 
 
AFI17-110  23 MAY 2018 
25 
Attachment 2 
WARFIGHTING MISSION AREA CATEGORIZATION CRITERIA AND RATIONALE 
Figure A2.1.  Warfighting Mission Ara Categorization Criteria and Rationale. 
Mission Readiness Support Systems  
Systems that support mission readiness 
should be categorized as Warfighting Mission 
Area or Defense Intelligence Mission Area 
Research and Development Systems  
Systems that support research and 
development should be categorized as 
Warfighting Mission Area, Defense 
Intelligence Mission Area or Business 
Mission Area.   
 
Information Technology investment uniquely 
identified as Science and Technology (S&T) 
or Developmental Test and Evaluation (DTE) 
and do not directly support a business 
function are Warfighting Mission Area. 
National Security Systems 
Systems which: 
 
(1) involve command and control of military 
forces; 
 
(2) involve equipment that is an integral 
part of a weapon or weapons system 
 
26 
AFI17-110  23 MAY 2018 
Attachment 3 
BUSINESS MISSION AREA CATEGORIZATION CRITERIA AND RATIONALE 
Figure A3.1.  Business Mission Area Categorization Criteria and Rationale. 
Case Management System 
If the system is a Case Management system 
for business information, it should be 
categorized as Defense Business System in 
Business Mission Area. 
 
Financial Management System 
If the system is a Financial Management 
System for business information, it should be 
categorized as Defense Business System in 
Business Mission Area 
Human Resource Management System  
If the system is a Human Resource 
Management System for business 
information, it should be categorized as 
Defense Business System in Business 
Mission Area 
Knowledge Management System 
If the system is a Knowledge Management 
System for business information, it should be 
categorized as Defense Business System in 
Business Mission Area 
Logistics Systems 
If the system is a Logistics System for 
business information, it should be categorized 
as Defense Business System in Business 
Mission Area 
Management Systems  
Management systems used for tracking and 
reporting of business information at DoD 
agencies should be categorized as Defense 
Business System in the Business Mission 
Area. 
Records Management Systems  
Records Management Systems and Workflow 
Management for business Information should 
be categorized as Defense Business System in 
the Business Mission Area. 
Support Business Management Systems 
Supporting Business Management 
Systems/functions (tasks, correspondence 
management, foreign disclosure, Freedom of 
Information Act, postal, public 
communications, inspection, audit, survey, 
project management and physical access 
control) should be categorized as a Defense 
Business System in Business Mission Area. 
Acquisition Support Systems  
If the system is a Acquisition Support System 
for business information, it should be 
AFI17-110  23 MAY 2018 
27 
categorized as Defense Business System in 
Business Mission Area 
Business Security Systems  
Systems that support business aspects of 
security (such as those in the Defense 
Security Enterprise (see DoD Directive 
5200.43) should be categorized as Defense 
Business System in Business Mission Area 
Research and Development Systems  
Systems that support research and 
development should be categorized as 
Warfighting Mission Area, Defense 
Intelligence Mission Area or Business 
Mission Area.  Questions that may help 
determine if the R&D system falls within 
Business Mission Area are listed below: 
 
Does the Information Technology investment 
support a business operation, function, or 
activity which meets the definition of a 
Defense Business System? 
 
Does the investment used to support a 
business operation, function, or activity meet 
the definition of an information system, as 
defined in title 44 USC section 3502? 
 
Does the Information Technology investment 
rely on other Defense Business Systems for 
interoperability? 
 
Does the Information Technology investment 
rely on a level of adherence to the BEA to 
effectively guide, constrain and permit 
interoperable Defense Business Systems 
solutions or support the governance 
framework for Defense Business Systems? 
 
Does the Information Technology investment 
involve inherently managerial functions or 
provide business functions or capabilities 
such as strategic planning, 
case/correspondence/records management, 
project or program management, or other staff 
functions performed at a management 
headquarters level? 
 
28 
AFI17-110  23 MAY 2018 
Attachment 4 
INFORMATION ENVIRONMENT MISSION AREA CATEGORIZATION CRITERIA 
AND RATIONALE 
Figure A4.1.  Information Environment Mission Area Categorization Criteria and 
Rationale. 
Portals and Intranets 
Generic – Information Environment Mission 
Area 
If the system is a generic portal capability 
(e.g., out-of-the box SharePoint, Livelink or 
similar), or intranet capability that provides 
basic file sharing, calendar and workflow, 
without custom applications, then it should be 
categorized as Information Environment 
Mission Area. 
 
Complex Capability – Support Mission Area 
If the system has custom application(s) built 
on a portal or intranet capability that provide 
significant functionality to support a mission 
area, then it should be categorized as the 
corresponding non-Information Environment 
Mission Area. 
 
Websites  
Static Websites with little or no system 
functionality should be categorized as 
Information Environment Mission Area. 
Information Technology Asset Management 
(ITAM)/Information Technology Service 
Management (ITSM) 
Systems that support ITAM/ITSM processes 
should be categorized as Information 
Environment Mission Area 
System Engineering Life-cycle Support 
(SELC) 
SELC – Information Environment Mission 
Area 
Systems that support the Systems Engineering 
Lifecycle (e.g., architecture, requirements, 
software development, configuration, test and 
project management) should be categorized as 
Information Environment Mission Area. 
 
SELC support systems that are embedded 
within non-Information Environment Mission 
Area programs of record, should not be 
separately categorized or reported. 
 
AFI17-110  23 MAY 2018 
29 
Attachment 5 
DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE MISSION AREA CATEGORIZATION CRITERIA AND 
RATIONALE 
Figure A5.1.  Defense Intelligence Mission Area Categorization Criteria and Rationale. 
National Security Systems 
Systems which: 
 
(1) involve intelligence activities; 
 
(2) involve cryptologic activities related to 
national security; 
 
(3) is critical to the direct fulfillment of 
military or intelligence missions (that is not 
used for routine administrative and business 
applications (including payroll, finance, 
logistics and personnel management 
applications)). 
Research and Development Systems 
Systems that support research and 
development should be categorized as 
Warfighting Mission Area, Defense 
Intelligence Mission Area or Business 
Mission Area.  Questions that may help 
determine if the R&D system falls within 
Defense Intelligence Mission Area are listed 
below: 
 
Does the Information Technology investment 
include investments within the Military 
Intelligence Program? 
 
Does the Information Technology investment 
involve intelligence or cryptologic activities 
related to national security? 
 
 
30 
AFI17-110  23 MAY 2018 
Attachment 6 
CAPITAL PLANNING AND INVESTMENT CONTROL QUESTIONNAIRE 
A6.1.  “Select” Phase Questions directed by Office of Management and Budget A-130. 
A6.1.1.  Perform business case analyses for Information Technology investments using the 
DoD Information Technology Business Case Analysis template that are tailored according to 
the investment’s scope.  The DoD Information Technology Business Case Analysis is 
available on the DoD Chief Information Officer Portal. 
A6.1.2.  Have an investment selection process and associated criteria.  Recommended 
general questions regarding the proposed Information Technology investment or solution are 
as follows. 
A6.1.2.1.  Does it support a core Mission Area(s) or capability requirement that needs to 
be performed by the Air Force/DoD? 
A6.1.2.2.  Does it fill a performance capability gap in achieving strategic goals and 
objectives with the maximum benefits at the lowest life cycle cost among viable 
alternatives? 
A6.1.2.3.  Is the Information Technology investment or solution being undertaken 
because no alternative private sector or government source can more efficiently support 
the function? 
A6.1.2.4.  Is the Information Technology investment being proposed because there is not 
a similar solution already available or with minimum redesign or reconfiguration? 
A6.1.2.5.  Is the Information Technology investment unique or a potential enterprise 
solution? 
A6.1.2.6.  How far along is the project system, or initiative in defining the future state 
and developing the transition plan from the current state? 
A6.1.2.7.  What are the plans to transition to the future state? 
A6.1.2.8.  Are there funding commitments for the life cycle of this Information 
Technology investment?  Consider appropriations and Fiscal Years specific to their 
purpose. 
A6.1.2.9.  Does the Information Technology investment support work processes that have 
been simplified or otherwise redesigned to reduce costs, improve effectiveness, make 
best use of commercial off-the-shelf technology and enable secure information exchange 
and resource sharing? 
A6.1.2.10.  Does it demonstrate a projected best value, based on an analysis of 
quantifiable and qualitative benefits and costs and projected return on investment, which 
is clearly equal to or better than alternative uses of available public resources? 
A6.1.2.11.  Is the Information Technology investment consistent with applicable federal 
and DoD Information Enterprise and Air Force Enterprise Architecture? 
AFI17-110  23 MAY 2018 
31 
A6.1.2.12.  Does the proposed Information Technology investment or solution support 
the Air Force’s work process?  Do information flows integrate or align with DoD and Air 
Force strategic goals? 
A6.1.2.13.  Does the Information Technology investment or solution reflect the DoD 
Mission Areas’ or Functional capability areas’ technology direction? 
A6.1.2.14.  Does the Information Technology investment or solution adhere to standards 
that enable information exchange and resource sharing, while retaining flexibility in the 
choice of suppliers and in the design of local work processes? 
A6.1.2.15.  Are there other investments related to or dependent upon the investment?  
How will decisions about this investment affect those other investments? 
A6.1.2.16.  Determine if risk has been reduced by employing measures such as: 
A6.1.2.16.1.  Avoiding or isolating custom-designed components to minimize the 
potential adverse consequences on the overall project. 
A6.1.2.16.2.  Using fully tested pilots, simulations, or prototype implementations 
before going into production. 
A6.1.2.16.3.  Establishing clear measures and accountability for project progress. 
A6.1.2.16.4.  Securing substantial involvement and buy-in throughout the project 
from the program officials who will use the system. 
A6.1.2.17.  Does it employ an acquisition strategy that allocates risk between government 
and contractor, effectively uses competition, ties contract payments to accomplishments 
and takes maximum advantage of commercial technology? 
A6.1.2.18.  Have potential funding constraints been identified and considered? 
A6.1.2.19.  What is the expected return on investment for the investment or initiative? 
A6.1.2.20.  Have the ramifications of declining to fund certain investments or initiatives 
been given careful consideration? 
A6.1.2.21.  Have all opportunities to invest in crosscutting investments or initiatives been 
appropriately evaluated? 
A6.1.2.22.  Does the investment conflict, overlap with, or is it redundant with other 
projects or initiatives? 
A6.1.2.23.  Are the project owners capable of successfully executing the chosen 
Information Technology portfolio (i.e., are the appropriate resources available to 
complete the included investments or initiatives)? 
A6.1.2.24.  Does the investment or initiative make best use of commercial-off-the-shelf 
software, cloud computing and shared services? 
A6.2.  “Control” Phase Questions directed by Office of Management and Budget A-130. 
A6.2.1.  Annually perform a review of Information Technology investments addressing the 
criteria listed in the Select phase to ensure compliance and document changes. 
32 
AFI17-110  23 MAY 2018 
A6.2.2.  Ensure Information Technology investments remain consistent with federal, DoD 
and Air Force Enterprise Architecture. 
A6.2.3.  Address what pitfalls the Information Technology investments might encounter 
(e.g., events that could lead to poor outcomes) or have already encountered. 
A6.2.4.  Conduct a comparison of projected and realized outcomes and how they relate to 
pitfalls that have occurred for: 
A6.2.4.1.  Cost.  Is the cost of investments within budget of the initial contract award?  Is 
the cost of investments within budget of the overall projected contract value at time of 
award?  Is there under-spending of resources with no schedule variance? 
A6.2.4.2.  Schedule. Determine the percentage of deliverables delivered on time each 
quarter.  Address project schedule changes and impacts. 
A6.2.4.3.  Performance. Are investments delivering the anticipated return on investment? 
A6.3.  “Evaluation” Phase Questions directed by Office of Management and Budget A-130. 
A6.3.1.  Annually perform operational analyses for Major Information Technology 
investments that address whether investments meet/maintain expected criteria and how that 
relates to pitfalls that have occurred including outcomes (cost, schedule, performance and 
return on investment), efficiency/cost-effectiveness, support for requirements (including 
capability) and business needs. 
A6.3.2.  Determine a recommendation to continue, accelerate, decelerate, suspend or 
terminate an investment. 
A6.3.3.  Make use of post-implementation reviews. 
A6.3.4.  Develop and obtain Information Technology Governance Executive Group and/or 
Information Technology Governance Executive Board approval (as applicable) of disposition 
plans for each terminated or retired investment that addresses cessation and reallocation of 
Information Technology assets and funds and is in accordance with appropriate DoD records 
management, security and other Information Technology information management policies. 
 
AFI17-110  23 MAY 2018 
33 
Attachment 7 
AIR FORCE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY PORTFOLIO OWNER LIST 
Air Combat Command (ACC) 
Air Education and Training Command (AETC) 
Air Force District of Washington (AFDW) 
Air Force Global Strike Command (AFGSC) 
Air Force Material Command (AFMC) 
Air Force Operational Test and Evaluation Center (AFOTEC) 
Air Force Reserve Command (AFRC) 
Air Force Space Command (AFSPC) 
Air Force Special Operations Command (AFSOC) 
Air Mobility Command (AMC) 
Air National Guard (ANG) 
Deputy Chief of Staff, Air and Space Operations (AF/A3) 
Deputy Chief of Staff, Intelligence Surveillance and Reconnaissance (AF/A2) 
Deputy Chief of Staff, Logistics, Engineering, and Force Protection (AF/A4/7) 
Deputy Chief of Staff, Manpower, Personnel & Services (AF/A1) 
Deputy Chief of Staff, Strategic Plans and Requirements (AF/A5/8) 
Deputy Chief of Staff, Studies, Analyses, and Assessments (AF/A9) 
North American Aerospace Defense Command (NORAD) 
Pacific Air Forces (PACAF) 
Secretary of the Air Force, Acquisition (SAF/AQ) 
Secretary of the Air Force, Information Dominance & Chief Information Officer (SAF/CIO A6) 
Secretary of the Air Force, Financial Management and Comptroller (SAF/FM) 
Secretary of the Air Force, Administrative Assistant (SAF/AA) 
United States Air Force Academy (USAFA) 
United States Air Forces in Europe (USAFE) 
U.S. Central Command (CENTCOM) 
U.S. Northern Command (NORTHCOM) 
U.S. Transportation Command (TRANSCOM) 
U.S. Strategic Command (STRATCOM) 
 
 
