 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I I  
2 0 2 2  N A T I O N A L  D E F E N S E  S T R A T E G Y  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(This page left intentionally blank) 
 
 
 
 
I I I  
2 0 2 2  N A T I O N A L  D E F E N S E  S T R A T E G Y  
 
 
 
 
October 27, 2022 
 
President Biden has stated that we are living in a “decisive decade,” one stamped by dramatic 
changes in geopolitics, technology, economics, and our environment.  The defense strategy that 
the United States pursues will set the Department’s course for decades to come.  The Department 
of Defense owes it to our All-Volunteer Force and the American people to provide a clear picture 
of the challenges we expect to face in the crucial years ahead—and we owe them a clear and 
rigorous strategy for advancing our defense and security goals.  
The 2022 National Defense Strategy (NDS) details the Department’s path forward into that 
decisive decade—from helping to protect the American people, to promoting global security,  
to seizing new strategic opportunities, and to realizing and defending our democratic values.   
For the first time, the Department conducted its strategic reviews—the NDS, the Nuclear Posture 
Review (NPR) and Missile Defense Review (MDR)—in an integrated way, ensuring tight 
linkages between our strategy and our resources.  The NDS directs the Department to act 
urgently to sustain and strengthen U.S. deterrence, with the People’s Republic of China (PRC)  
as the pacing challenge for the Department.  The NDS further explains how we will collaborate 
with our NATO Allies and partners to reinforce robust deterrence in the face of Russian 
aggression while mitigating and protecting against threats from North Korea, Iran, violent 
extremist organizations, and transboundary challenges such as climate change.  
The PRC remains our most consequential strategic competitor for the coming decades.  I have 
reached this conclusion based on the PRC’s increasingly coercive actions to reshape the Indo-
Pacific region and the international system to fit its authoritarian preferences, alongside a keen 
awareness of the PRC’s clearly stated intentions and the rapid modernization and expansion of 
its military.  As President Biden’s National Security Strategy notes, the PRC is “the only country 
with both the intent to reshape the international order, and, increasingly, the economic, 
diplomatic, military, and technological power to do so.” 
Meanwhile, Russia’s unprovoked, unjust, and reckless invasion of Ukraine underscores its 
irresponsible behavior.  Efforts to respond to Russia’s assault on Ukraine also dramatically 
highlight the importance of a strategy that leverages the power of our values and our military 
might with that of our Allies and partners.  Together, we have marshalled a strong, unified 
response to Russia’s attack and proven the strength of NATO unity.  
In these times, business as usual at the Department is not acceptable.  The 2022 NDS lays out our 
vision for focusing the Defense Department around our pacing challenge, even as we manage the 
other threats of our swiftly changing world.  It builds on my 2021 Message to the Force, which 
stressed as core values defending the nation, taking care of our people, and succeeding through 
teamwork.   
 
I V  
2 0 2 2  N A T I O N A L  D E F E N S E  S T R A T E G Y  
 
Our central charge is to develop, combine, and coordinate our strengths to maximum effect.  This 
is the core of integrated deterrence, a centerpiece of the 2022 NDS.  Integrated deterrence means 
using every tool at the Department’s disposal, in close collaboration with our counterparts across 
the U.S. Government and with Allies and partners, to ensure that potential foes understand the 
folly of aggression.  The Department will align policies, investments, and activities to sustain 
and strengthen deterrence—tailored to specific competitors and challenges and coordinated and 
synchronized inside and outside the Department.   
The Department will also campaign day-to-day to gain and sustain military advantages, counter 
acute forms of our competitors’ coercion, and complicate our competitors’ military preparations.  
Campaigning is not business as usual—it is the deliberate effort to synchronize the Department’s 
activities and investments to aggregate focus and resources to shift conditions in our favor.  
Through campaigning, the Department will focus on the most consequential competitor activities 
that, if left unaddressed, would endanger our military advantages now and in the future.  
Even as we take these steps, we will act with urgency to build enduring advantages for the future 
Joint Force, undertaking reforms to accelerate force development, getting the technology we 
need more quickly, and making investments in the extraordinary people of the Department, who 
remain our most valuable resource.  
America has never been afraid of competition, and we do not shy away from tough challenges, 
especially when it comes to securing our national interests and defending our national values.   
To meet this moment, we will tap into our core strengths: our dynamic, diverse, and innovative 
society; our unmatched network of Allies and partners; and the tremendous men and women of 
our armed forces.  
We live in turbulent times.  Yet, I am confident that the Department, along with our counterparts 
throughout the U.S. Government and our Allies and partners around the world, is well positioned 
to meet the challenges of this decisive decade. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
V  
2 0 2 2  N A T I O N A L  D E F E N S E  S T R A T E G Y  
 
 
 
 
 
 
I. INTRODUCTION ....................................................................................................................... 1 
II. SECURITY ENVIRONMENT .................................................................................................. 4 
III. DEFENSE PRIORITIES .......................................................................................................... 7 
IV. INTEGRATED DETERRENCE .............................................................................................. 8 
V. CAMPAIGNING ..................................................................................................................... 12 
VI. ANCHORING OUR STRATEGY IN ALLIES AND PARTNERS  
      AND ADVANCING REGIONAL GOALS ........................................................................... 14 
VII. FORCE PLANNING ............................................................................................................. 17 
VIII. BUILDING ENDURING ADVANTAGES ........................................................................ 19 
IX. RISK MANAGEMENT ......................................................................................................... 22 
X. CONCLUSION ........................................................................................................................ 23 
2022 NUCLEAR POSTURE REVIEW ......................................................................................... 1 
2022 MISSILE DEFENSE REVIEW ............................................................................................. 1 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
V I  
2 0 2 2  N A T I O N A L  D E F E N S E  S T R A T E G Y  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(This page left intentionally blank) 
 
 
 
1  
2 0 2 2  N A T I O N A L  D E F E N S E  S T R A T E G Y  
I. INTRODUCTION 
For more than seven decades, the vision and leadership of the United States have undergirded 
international peace and prosperity. A strong, principled, and adaptive U.S. military is a central 
pillar for U.S. leadership, particularly in the face of challenges arising from dramatic geopolitical, 
technological, economic, and environmental change. The Department of Defense stands ready to 
meet these challenges and seize opportunities with the confidence, creativity, and commitment that 
have long characterized our military and the democracy that it serves.  
The Department will focus on safeguarding and advancing vital U.S. national interests. We will 
work alongside other agencies and departments to:  
► Protect the security of the American people; 
► Expand economic prosperity and opportunity; and 
► Realize and defend the values at the heart of American way of life. 
The 2022 National Defense Strategy (NDS) sets forth how the U.S. military will meet growing 
threats to vital U.S. national security interests and to a stable and open international system. It 
directs the Department to act urgently to sustain and strengthen U.S. deterrence, with the People’s 
Republic of China (PRC) as the Department’s pacing challenge. 
The strategy identifies four top-level defense priorities that the Department must pursue to 
strengthen deterrence. First, we will defend the homeland. Second, we will deter strategic attacks 
against the United States, our Allies, and our partners. Third, we will deter aggression and be 
prepared to prevail in conflict when necessary. Fourth, to ensure our future military advantage, we 
will build a resilient Joint Force and defense ecosystem.  
The Department will advance our priorities through integrated deterrence, campaigning, and 
actions that build enduring advantages. Integrated deterrence entails working seamlessly across 
warfighting domains, theaters, the spectrum of conflict, all instruments of U.S. national power, 
and our network of Alliances and partnerships. Tailored to specific circumstances, it applies a 
coordinated, multifaceted approach to reducing competitors’ perceptions of the net benefits of 
aggression relative to restraint. Integrated deterrence is enabled by combat-credible forces 
prepared to fight and win, as needed, and backstopped by a safe, secure, and effective nuclear 
deterrent. 
Day after day, the Department will strengthen deterrence and gain advantage against competitors’ 
most consequential coercive measures by campaigning – the conduct and sequencing of logically-
linked military initiatives aimed at advancing well-defined, strategy-aligned priorities over time. 
The United States will operate forces, synchronize broader Departmental efforts, and align 
Departmental activities with other instruments of national power to counter forms of competitor 
coercion, complicate competitors’ military preparations, and develop our own warfighting 
capabilities together with those of our Allies and partners.  
 
2  
2 0 2 2  N A T I O N A L  D E F E N S E  S T R A T E G Y  
To shore up the foundations for integrated deterrence and campaigning, we will act urgently to 
build enduring advantages across the defense ecosystem – the Department of Defense, the defense 
industrial base, and the array of private sector and academic enterprises that create and sharpen the 
Joint Force’s technological edge. We will modernize the systems that design and build the Joint 
Force, with a focus on innovation and rapid adjustment to new strategic demands. We will make 
our supporting systems more resilient and agile in the face of threats that range from competitors 
to the effects of climate change. And we will cultivate our talents, recruiting and training a 
workforce with the skills, abilities, and diversity we need to creatively solve national security 
challenges in a complex global environment.  
The 2022 NDS advances a strategy focused on the PRC and on collaboration with our growing 
network of Allies and partners on common objectives. It seeks to prevent the PRC’s dominance of 
key regions while protecting the U.S. homeland and reinforcing a stable and open international 
system. Consistent with the 2022 National Security Strategy (NSS), a key objective of the NDS is 
to dissuade the PRC from considering aggression as a viable means of advancing goals that 
threaten vital U.S. national interests. Conflict with the PRC is neither inevitable nor desirable. The 
Department’s priorities support broader whole-of-government efforts to develop terms of 
interaction with the PRC that are favorable to our interests and values, while managing strategic 
competition and enabling the pursuit of cooperation on common challenges. 
Even as we focus on the PRC as our pacing challenge, the NDS also accounts for the acute threat 
posed by Russia, demonstrated most recently by Russia’s unprovoked further invasion of Ukraine. 
The Department will support robust deterrence of Russian aggression against vital U.S. national 
interests, including our treaty Allies. We will work closely with the North Atlantic Treaty 
Organization (NATO) and our partners to provide U.S. leadership, develop key enabling 
capabilities, and deepen interoperability. In service of our strategic priorities, we will accept 
measured risk but remain vigilant in the face of other persistent threats, including those posed by 
North Korea, Iran, and violent extremist organizations (VEOs). We will also build resilience in 
the face of destabilizing and potentially catastrophic transboundary challenges such as climate 
change and pandemics, which increasingly strain the Joint Force. 
We cannot meet these complex and interconnected challenges alone. Mutually-beneficial 
Alliances and partnerships are our greatest global strategic advantage – and they are a center of 
gravity for this strategy. We will strengthen major regional security architectures with our Allies 
and partners based on complementary contributions; combined, collaborative operations and force 
planning; increased intelligence and information sharing; new operational concepts; and our ability 
to draw on the Joint Force worldwide. 
We cannot delay. The NSS describes the United States’ agenda for renewal in the coming “decisive 
decade,” a ten-year window for leadership to tackle our era’s defining challenges. In full accord 
with the urgency conveyed by the NSS and in support of its broader goals, the Department will 
move immediately to implement the changes detailed in this NDS, the Secretary of Defense’s 
preeminent guidance document. 
 
3  
2 0 2 2  N A T I O N A L  D E F E N S E  S T R A T E G Y  
The challenges we face are formidable, but the United States possesses strengths that our 
competitors cannot match. Our democratic values, our open society, our diversity, our base of 
innovation, our culture of ingenuity, our combat experience, our globe-spanning network of 
Alliances and partnerships, and above all our extraordinary All Volunteer Force – these together 
provide firm foundations for a defense strategy that will keep America secure, prosperous,  
and free. 
 
 
4  
2 0 2 2  N A T I O N A L  D E F E N S E  S T R A T E G Y  
II. SECURITY ENVIRONMENT 
Now and over the next two decades, we face strategic challenges stemming from complex 
interactions between a rapidly changing global balance of military capabilities; emerging 
technologies; competitor doctrines that pose new threats to the U.S. homeland and to strategic 
stability; an escalation of competitors’ coercive and malign activities in the “gray zone”; and 
transboundary challenges that impose new demands on the Joint Force and the defense enterprise. 
These developments and the threats they present are interconnected – in part because our 
competitors deliberately link them to erode deterrence, exert economic coercion, and endanger the 
political autonomy of states. Competitor strategies seek to exploit perceived vulnerabilities in the 
American way of war, including by creating anti-access/area-denial environments; developing 
conventional capabilities to undertake rapid interventions; posing all-domain threats to the U.S. 
homeland in an effort to jeopardize the U.S. military’s ability to project power and counter regional 
aggression; and using the cyber and space domains to gain operational, logistical, and information 
advantages. At the same time, our competitors are building larger and more diverse nuclear 
arsenals and working to distract and divide the United States and our Allies and partners. 
Strategic Competition with the People’s Republic of China (PRC). The most 
comprehensive and serious challenge to U.S. national security is the PRC’s coercive and 
increasingly aggressive endeavor to refashion the Indo-Pacific region and the international system 
to suit its interests and authoritarian preferences. The PRC seeks to undermine U.S. alliances and 
security partnerships in the Indo-Pacific region, and leverage its growing capabilities, including 
its economic influence and the People’s Liberation Army’s (PLA) growing strength and military 
footprint, to coerce its neighbors and threaten their interests. The PRC’s increasingly provocative 
rhetoric and coercive activity towards Taiwan are destabilizing, risk miscalculation, and threaten 
the peace and stability of the Taiwan Strait. This is part of a broader pattern of destabilizing and 
coercive PRC behavior that stretches across the East China Sea, the South China Sea, and along 
the Line of Actual Control. The PRC has expanded and modernized nearly every aspect of the 
PLA, with a focus on offsetting U.S. military advantages. The PRC is therefore the pacing 
challenge for the Department. 
In addition to expanding its conventional forces, the PLA is rapidly advancing and integrating its 
space, counterspace, cyber, electronic, and informational warfare capabilities to support its holistic 
approach to joint warfare. The PLA seeks to target the ability of the Joint Force to project power 
to defend vital U.S. interests and aid our Allies in a crisis or conflict. The PRC is also expanding 
the PLA’s global footprint and working to establish a more robust overseas and basing 
infrastructure to allow it to project military power at greater distances. In parallel, the PRC is 
accelerating the modernization and expansion of its nuclear capabilities. The United States and its 
Allies and partners will increasingly face the challenge of deterring two major powers with modern 
and diverse nuclear capabilities – the PRC and Russia – creating new stresses on strategic stability. 
 
 
5  
2 0 2 2  N A T I O N A L  D E F E N S E  S T R A T E G Y  
Russia as an Acute Threat. Even as the PRC poses the Department’s pacing challenge, recent 
events underscore the acute threat posed by Russia. Contemptuous of its neighbors’ independence, 
Russia’s government seeks to use force to impose border changes and to reimpose an imperial 
sphere of influence. Its extensive track record of territorial aggression includes the escalation of 
its brutal, unprovoked war against Ukraine. Although its leaders’ political and military actions 
intended to fracture NATO have backfired dramatically, the goal remains. Russia presents serious, 
continuing risks in key areas. These include nuclear threats to the homeland and U.S. Allies and 
partners; long-range cruise missile threats; cyber and information operations; counterspace threats; 
chemical and biological weapons (CBW); undersea warfare; and extensive gray zone campaigns 
targeted against democracies in particular. Russia has incorporated these capabilities and methods 
into an overall strategy that, like the PRC’s, seeks to exploit advantages in geography and time 
backed by a mix of threats to the U.S. homeland and to our Allies and partners. 
Although diverging interests and historical mistrust may limit the depth of their political and 
military cooperation, the PRC and Russia relationship continues to increase in breadth. Either state 
could seek to create dilemmas globally for the Joint Force in the event of U.S. engagement in a 
crisis or a conflict with the other. 
Threats to the U.S. Homeland. The scope and scale of threats to the homeland have 
fundamentally changed. The PRC and Russia now pose more dangerous challenges to safety and 
security at home, even as terrorist threats persist. Both states are already using non-kinetic means 
against our defense industrial base and mobilization systems, as well as deploying counterspace 
capabilities that can target our Global Positioning System and other space-based capabilities that 
support military power and daily civilian life. The PRC or Russia could use a wide array of tools 
in an attempt to hinder U.S. military preparation and response in a conflict, including actions aimed 
at undermining the will of the U.S. public, and to target our critical infrastructure and other 
systems. These threats, along with the toll taken by climate change, pandemics, and other 
transborder challenges will increase demands on Department resources, federal civil authorities, 
and the public and private sectors.  
Other Persistent Threats – North Korea, Iran, and VEOs. North Korea continues to 
expand its nuclear and missile capability to threaten the U.S. homeland, deployed U.S. forces, and 
the Republic of Korea (ROK) and Japan, while seeking to drive wedges between the United States-
ROK and United States-Japan Alliances. Iran is taking actions that would improve its ability to 
produce a nuclear weapon should it make the decision to do so, even as it builds and exports 
extensive missile forces, uncrewed aircraft systems, and advanced maritime capabilities that 
threaten chokepoints for the free flow of energy resources and international commerce. Iran further 
undermines Middle East stability by supporting terrorist groups and military proxies, employing 
its own paramilitary forces, engaging in military provocations, and conducting malicious cyber 
and information operations. Global terrorist groups – including al-Qa’ida, Islamic State in Iraq and 
Syria (ISIS), and their affiliates – have had their capabilities degraded, but some may be able to 
 
6  
2 0 2 2  N A T I O N A L  D E F E N S E  S T R A T E G Y  
reconstitute them in short order, which will require monitoring indications and warning against the 
VEO threat.  
Complex Escalation Dynamics: Rapidly Evolving Domains and Technologies. A 
wide range of new or fast-evolving technologies and applications are complicating escalation 
dynamics and creating new challenges for strategic stability. These include counterspace weapons, 
hypersonic weapons, advanced CBW, and new and emerging payload and delivery systems for 
both conventional and non-strategic nuclear weapons. In the cyber and space domains, the risk of 
inadvertent escalation is particularly high due to unclear norms of behavior and escalation 
thresholds, complex domain interactions, and new capabilities. New applications of artificial 
intelligence, quantum science, autonomy, biotechnology, and space technologies have the 
potential not just to change kinetic conflict, but also to disrupt day-to-day U.S. supply chain and 
logistics operations. 
Competitors’ Gray Zone Activities. Competitors now commonly seek adverse changes in 
the status quo using gray zone methods – coercive approaches that may fall below perceived 
thresholds for U.S. military action and across areas of responsibility of different parts of the U.S. 
Government. The PRC employs state-controlled forces, cyber and space operations, and economic 
coercion against the United States and its Allies and partners. Russia employs disinformation, 
cyber, and space operations against the United States and our Allies and partners, and irregular 
proxy forces in multiple countries. Other state actors, particularly North Korea and Iran, use similar 
if currently more limited means. The proliferation of advanced missiles, uncrewed aircraft systems, 
and cyber tools to military proxies allows competitors to threaten U.S. forces, Allies, and partners, 
in indirect and deniable ways. 
Climate Change and other Transboundary Challenges. Beyond state and non-state 
actors, changes in global climate and other dangerous transboundary threats are already 
transforming the context in which the Department operates. Increasing temperatures, changing 
precipitation patterns, rising sea levels, and more frequent extreme weather conditions will affect 
basing and access while degrading readiness, installations, and capabilities. Climate change is 
creating new corridors of strategic interaction, particularly in the Arctic region. It will increase 
demands, including on the Joint Force, for disaster response and defense support of civil 
authorities, and affect security relationships with some Allies and partners. Insecurity and 
instability related to climate change may tax governance capacity in some countries while 
heightening tensions between others, risking new armed conflicts and increasing demands for 
stabilization activities.  
The COVID-19 pandemic continues to impact societies, global supply chains, and the U.S. defense 
industrial base. It has required substantial commitment of Department resources for support of 
civil authorities and support to international partners. COVID-19 also spotlights the costs and risks 
of future biological threats, whether natural or human-made, for the Department and the  
Joint Force.  
 
 
7  
2 0 2 2  N A T I O N A L  D E F E N S E  S T R A T E G Y  
III. DEFENSE PRIORITIES  
Together, these rapidly evolving features of the security environment threaten to erode the United 
States’ ability to deter aggression and to help maintain favorable balances of power in critical 
regions. The PRC presents the most consequential and systemic challenge, while Russia poses 
acute threats – both to vital U.S. national interests abroad and to the homeland. Other features of 
the security environment, including climate change and other transboundary threats, will 
increasingly place pressure on the Joint Force and the systems that support it. 
In this context, and in support of a stable and open international system and our defense 
commitments, the Department’s priorities are: 
► Defending the homeland, paced to the growing multi-domain threat posed by the PRC;  
► Deterring strategic attacks against the United States, Allies, and partners;  
► Deterring aggression, while being prepared to prevail in conflict when necessary – 
prioritizing the PRC challenge in the Indo-Pacific region, then the Russia challenge in 
Europe; and,  
► Building a resilient Joint Force and defense ecosystem.  
 
 
8  
2 0 2 2  N A T I O N A L  D E F E N S E  S T R A T E G Y  
IV. INTEGRATED DETERRENCE 
Our competitors, particularly the PRC, are pursuing holistic strategies that employ varied forms of 
coercion, malign behavior, and aggression to achieve their objectives and weaken the foundations 
of a stable and open international system.  
Meeting the challenge requires a holistic response: integrated deterrence. In the past, the 
Department’s approach to deterrence has too often been hindered by competing priorities; lack of 
clarity regarding the specific competitor actions we seek to deter; an emphasis on deterring 
behaviors in instances where Department authorities and tools are ill-suited; and stovepiping. 
Integrated deterrence is how we will align the Department’s policies, investments, and activities 
to sustain and strengthen deterrence – tailored to specific competitors and coordinated to maximum 
effect inside and outside the Department. 
How We Will Deter. Deterrence is strengthened by actions that reduce a competitor’s 
perception of the benefits of aggression relative to restraint. Effective deterrence requires the 
Department to consider how competitors perceive U.S., Ally, and partner stakes, commitment, and 
combat credibility; their perception of their own ability to control escalation risks; and their view 
of how the status quo will evolve – in part as a result of U.S., Ally, and partner actions – if they 
do not use force. Actions aimed at strengthening deterrence work by different logics: denial, 
resilience, and cost imposition. Optimal combinations need to be tailored to specific settings and 
deterrence objectives in an integrated deterrence approach. 
Deterrence by Denial. To deter aggression, especially where potential adversaries could act to 
rapidly seize territory, the Department will develop asymmetric approaches and optimize our 
posture for denial. In the near-term, we will continue to develop innovative operational concepts 
and supplement current capabilities and posture through investments in mature, high-value assets. 
Over the mid- to long-term, we will develop new capabilities, including in long-range strike, 
undersea, hypersonic, and autonomous systems, and improve information sharing and the 
integration of non-kinetic tools. 
Deterrence by Resilience. Denying the benefits of aggression also requires resilience – the ability 
to withstand, fight through, and recover quickly from disruption. The Department will improve its 
ability to operate in the face of multi-domain attacks on a growing surface of vital networks and 
critical infrastructure, both in the homeland and in collaboration with Allies and partners at risk. 
Because the cyber and space domains empower the entire Joint Force, we will prioritize building 
resilience in these areas. Cyber resilience will be enhanced by, for example, modern encryption 
and a zero-trust architecture. In the space domain, the Department will reduce adversary incentives 
for early attack by fielding diverse, resilient, and redundant satellite constellations. We will bolster 
our ability to fight through disruption by improving defensive capabilities and increasing options 
for reconstitution. We will assist Allies and partners in doing the same. 
 
 
9  
2 0 2 2  N A T I O N A L  D E F E N S E  S T R A T E G Y  
Deterrence by Direct and Collective Cost Imposition. Denial and resilience strategies are necessary 
but not always sufficient. Effective deterrence may also hinge on our ability to impose costs in 
excess to the perceived benefits of aggression. The Department will continue to modernize our 
nuclear forces, the ultimate backstop to deter attacks on the homeland and our Allies and partners 
who rely on U.S. extended deterrence. Direct cost imposition approaches also include a broad 
range of other means, including conventional long-range fires, offensive cyber, irregular warfare, 
support for foreign internal defense, and interagency instruments, such as economic sanctions, 
export controls, and diplomatic measures. 
Collective cost imposition approaches increase the expectation that aggression will be met with a 
collective response. Through close collaboration with U.S. Government departments and agencies 
and with our Allies and partners, we will diversify our posture and broaden the scope of 
cooperation, adding complexity to competitors’ military planning and execution. U.S. leadership 
in shaping norms for appropriate conduct in the cyber, space, and other emerging technology 
domains will reinforce deterrence by increasing international consensus on what constitutes malign 
and aggressive behavior, thereby increasing the prospect of collective attribution and response 
when these norms are violated. 
Role of Information in Deterrence. Deterrence depends in part on competitors’ understanding of 
U.S. intent and capabilities. The Department must seek to avoid unknowingly driving competition 
to aggression. To strengthen deterrence while managing escalation risks, the Department will 
enhance its ability to operate in the information domain – for example, by working to ensure that 
messages are conveyed effectively. We will work in collaboration with other U.S. Federal 
departments and agencies along with Allies and partners.  
Tailored Deterrence Approaches. Coordinating and applying deterrence logics to maximum 
effect requires tailoring for specific problems, competitors, and settings. 
Deterring Attacks against the Homeland. The Department will take steps to raise potential 
attackers’ direct and indirect costs while reducing their expected benefits for aggressive action 
against the homeland, particularly by increasing resilience. We will ensure that hostile operations 
– including those conducted early in a crisis or conflict – will not advance adversary objectives or 
severely limit U.S. response options. Our work will prioritize closer coordination with U.S. 
interagency, state, local, tribal, and territorial partners, as well as with the private sector, starting 
with the defense industrial base.  
Deterring Strategic Attacks. Any adversary use of nuclear weapons, regardless of location or yield, 
would fundamentally alter the nature of a conflict, create the potential for uncontrolled escalation, 
and have strategic effects. To maintain credible and effective deterrence of both large-scale and 
limited nuclear attacks from a range of adversaries, the Department will modernize nuclear forces, 
nuclear command, control, and communications, and the nuclear weapon production enterprise, 
and strengthen extended deterrence. We will bolster regional nuclear deterrence by enhanced 
consultations with Allies and partners and by better synchronizing conventional and nuclear 
 
1 0  
2 0 2 2  N A T I O N A L  D E F E N S E  S T R A T E G Y  
aspects of planning – including by improving conventional forces’ ability to operate in the face of 
limited nuclear, chemical, and biological attacks so as to deny adversaries benefit from possessing 
and employing such weapons. The Department will employ an integrated deterrence approach that 
draws on tailored combinations of conventional, cyber, space, and information capabilities, 
together with the unique deterrent effects of nuclear weapons.  
Deterring PRC Attacks. The Department will bolster deterrence by leveraging existing and 
emergent force capabilities, posture, and activities to enhance denial, and by enhancing the 
resilience of U.S. systems the PRC may seek to target. We will develop new operational concepts 
and enhanced future warfighting capabilities against potential PRC aggression. Collaboration with 
Allies and partners will cement joint capability with the aid of multilateral exercises, co-
development of technologies, greater intelligence and information sharing, and combined planning 
for shared deterrence challenges. We will also build enduring advantages, undertaking 
foundational improvements and enhancements to ensure our technological edge and Joint Force 
combat credibility. 
Deterring Russian Attacks. The Department will focus on deterring Russian attacks on the United 
States, NATO members, and other Allies, reinforcing our iron-clad treaty commitments, to include 
conventional aggression that has the potential to escalate to nuclear employment of any scale. We 
will work together with our Allies and partners to modernize denial capabilities, increase 
interoperability, improve resilience against attack and coercion, share intelligence, and strengthen 
extended nuclear deterrence. Over time, the Department will focus on enhancing denial 
capabilities and key enablers in NATO’s force planning, while NATO Allies seek to bolster their 
conventional warfighting capabilities. For Ally and partner countries that border Russia, the 
Department will support efforts to build out response options that enable cost imposition. 
Deterring North Korean Attacks. The Department will continue to deter attacks through forward 
posture; integrated air and missile defense; close coordination and interoperability with our ROK 
Ally; nuclear deterrence; resilience initiatives; and the potential for direct cost imposition 
approaches that come from globally deployable Joint Forces.  
Deterring Iranian Attacks. To deter large-scale Iranian attacks on vital national security interests 
and partners in the region, the Department will work to increase partner capability and resilience, 
particularly in air and missile defense, while collaborating with partners to expose Iranian gray 
zone operations. The Department will continue to support U.S. interagency and international 
efforts to prevent Iran from acquiring a nuclear weapon. 
Escalation Management. Changes in the security environment – particularly in the space and 
cyber domains – are likely to increase opacity during a crisis or conflict, threatening strategic 
stability. The Department will develop tailored approaches to assess and manage escalation risk in 
both crises and conflicts, including conducting analysis of escalation pathways and thresholds, and 
planning for situations with decreased domain awareness and impaired communications. We will 
strengthen strategic stability through dialogue with competitors, unilateral measures that make 
command, control, and communications more robust, and by developing defenses and architectural 
 
1 1  
2 0 2 2  N A T I O N A L  D E F E N S E  S T R A T E G Y  
resilience to maintain operational capabilities in cyberspace and space during conflict. Establishing 
and practicing crisis communications with Allies and partners, as well as with competitors, is an 
essential tool to reduce mutual misperceptions and to help manage escalation.  
 
 
1 2  
2 0 2 2  N A T I O N A L  D E F E N S E  S T R A T E G Y  
V. CAMPAIGNING 
The Department strengthens deterrence and gains military advantages not only by building Joint 
Force capabilities, but also by campaigning – the conduct and sequencing of logically-linked 
military activities to achieve strategy-aligned objectives over time. Campaigning initiatives change 
the environment to the benefit of the United States and our Allies and partners, while limiting, 
frustrating, and disrupting competitor activities that seriously impinge on our interests, especially 
those carried out in the gray zone.  
Campaigning requires discipline. It targets the most consequential competitor activities – those 
that, if left unaddressed, would endanger our military advantages and vital national interests now 
and in the future. Successful campaigning begins with focused planning that specifies how an 
initiative supports our defense priorities, establishes clear connections with the Department’s ways 
and means, and incorporates feedback loops. In service of strategic prioritization, we will focus 
day-to-day force employment on a more narrow set of tasks than we do currently. 
Campaigning to Gain Military Advantage, Enhance Deterrence, and Address 
Gray Zone Challenges. The Department will actively campaign across domains and the 
spectrum of conflict. Campaigning initiatives will improve our baseline understanding of the 
operating environment and seek to shape perceptions, including by sowing doubt in our 
competitors that they can achieve their objectives or conduct unattributed coercive actions. They 
will disrupt competitor warfighting advantages while reinforcing our own, and enhance 
interoperability and access. Working with Allies and partners, we will build and exercise force 
elements needed in crisis or conflict, such as infrastructure, logistics, command and control, 
dispersal and relocation, and mobilization. 
Competitors increasingly engage in gray zone operations at odds with international norms and 
below the threshold of a credible military response. Emerging technologies and applications are 
making these activities more effective at building competitors’ military and non-military 
advantages which, if left unaddressed, could endanger U.S. military effectiveness now and in the 
future. 
The Department will be judicious in its use of defense resources and efforts to counter competitors’ 
coercive behaviors in gray zone operations, as traditional military tools may not always be the 
most appropriate response. In many cases, intelligence sharing, economic measures, diplomatic 
actions, and activities in the information domain conducted by other U.S. departments and 
agencies may prove more effective. Nevertheless, there can be an important role for campaigning 
to disrupt competitors’ attempts to advance their objectives through gray zone tactics, especially 
when integrated for maximum impact with the actions of Allies, partners, and other U.S. 
departments and agencies. Campaigning initiatives will provide a range of options to oppose select, 
acute forms of coercion carried out by competitors. We will conduct cyberspace operations to 
degrade competitors’ malicious cyber activity and to prepare cyber capabilities to be used in crisis 
 
1 3  
2 0 2 2  N A T I O N A L  D E F E N S E  S T R A T E G Y  
or conflict. Tailored information operations can be used to support and in some instances lead the 
Department’s response. In campaigning, the Department will carefully evaluate and manage 
escalation risks.  
Campaigning and Our Global Posture. Our force posture will focus on the access and 
warfighting requirements that enable our efforts to deter potential PRC and Russian aggression 
against vital U.S. national interests, and to prevail in conflict if deterrence fails. The Department 
will conduct campaigning activities from this posture against a clear set of objectives, to include 
deterring adversary attacks, supporting rapid crisis response with survivable forces, and 
conducting operations to reinforce internationally-agreed-upon norms. In the Indo-Pacific, we will 
continue key infrastructure investments and coordinate with the Department of State to expand 
access in the region. In Europe, our posture will focus on command and control, fires, and key 
enablers that complement our NATO Allies’ capabilities and strengthen deterrence by increasing 
combat credibility. For other major threats, we will leverage security cooperation and capacity 
building with partners, backed by a monitor-and-respond approach that takes advantage of the 
deterrent value of the Department’s ability to deploy forces globally at the time and place of our 
choosing. Robust intelligence collection, in concert with the work of other departments and 
agencies, will seek to provide early indication and warning to help manage risk. 
 
 
 
1 4  
2 0 2 2  N A T I O N A L  D E F E N S E  S T R A T E G Y  
VI. ANCHORING OUR STRATEGY IN ALLIES AND 
PARTNERS AND ADVANCING REGIONAL GOALS 
Countries around the world have a vital interest in a free and open international system. Close 
collaboration with Allies and partners is foundational for U.S. national security interests and for 
our collective ability to address the challenges that the PRC and Russia present, while responsibly 
managing the array of other threats we face.  
We strive to be a trusted defense partner. We respect the sovereignty of all states, and we know 
that the decisions that our Allies and partners face are rarely binary. We recognize that when it 
comes to our security relationships, the Department cannot rely on rhetoric. Early and continuous 
consideration, engagement, and, where possible, collaboration with Allies and partners in planning 
is essential for advancing our shared interests. The 2022 National Defense Strategy is a call to 
action for the defense enterprise to incorporate Allies and partners at every stage of defense 
planning. 
To strengthen and sustain deterrence, the Department will prioritize interoperability and enable 
coalitions with enhanced capabilities, new operating concepts, and combined, collaborative force 
planning. We will consult and coordinate with Allies and partners as we modernize our nuclear 
forces, reinforcing our extended deterrence commitments. The Department will seek to improve 
denial capability, including resilience, particularly for those most exposed to military coercion. 
And we will support regional partners’ ability to respond to regional contingencies, provide 
strategic indicators and warning, and reduce competitors’ ability to hold key geographic and 
logistical chokepoints at risk. By joining with Allies and partners in efforts to enhance resilience 
to climate change, we will both strengthen defense relationships and reduce the need for the force 
to respond to instability and humanitarian emergencies. Overall, the Department will work across 
the interagency system and in concert with Allies and partners to advance regional security goals 
that implement the higher-level aims of integrated deterrence, while accounting for the cross-
regional and global dimensions of potential conflict. 
To succeed in these objectives, the Department will reduce institutional barriers, including those 
that inhibit collective research and development, planning, interoperability, intelligence and 
information sharing, and export of key capabilities. We will work across the U.S. Government to 
upgrade technology and information release processes, expand release authorizations, and redefine 
dissemination controls to facilitate information exchange for mutual benefit. 
The Indo-Pacific Region. The Department will reinforce and build out a resilient security 
architecture in the Indo-Pacific region in order to sustain a free and open regional order, and deter 
attempts to resolve disputes by force. We will modernize our Alliance with Japan and strengthen 
combined capabilities by aligning strategic planning and priorities in a more integrated manner; 
deepen our Alliance with Australia through investments in posture, interoperability, and expansion 
of multilateral cooperation; and foster advantage through advanced technology cooperation with 
 
1 5  
2 0 2 2  N A T I O N A L  D E F E N S E  S T R A T E G Y  
partnerships like AUKUS and the Indo-Pacific Quad. The Department will advance our Major 
Defense Partnership with India to enhance its ability to deter PRC aggression and ensure free and 
open access to the Indian Ocean region. The Department will support Taiwan’s asymmetric self-
defense commensurate with the evolving PRC threat and consistent with our one China policy. 
We will work with the ROK to continue to improve its defense capability to lead the Alliance 
combined defense, with U.S. forces augmenting those of the ROK. We will invigorate multilateral 
approaches to security challenges in the region, to include by promoting the role of the Association 
of Southeast Asian Nations in addressing regional security issues. The Department will work with 
Allies and partners to ensure power projection in a contested environment. The Department will 
also support Ally and partner efforts, in accordance with U.S. policy and international law, to 
address acute forms of gray zone coercion from the PRC’s campaigns to establish control over the 
East China Sea, Taiwan Strait, South China Sea, and disputed land borders such as with India. At 
the same time, the Department will continue to prioritize maintaining open lines of communication 
with the PLA and managing competition responsibly.  
Europe. The Department will maintain its bedrock commitment to NATO collective security, 
working alongside Allies and partners to deter, defend, and build resilience against further Russian 
military aggression and acute forms of gray zone coercion. As we continue contributing to NATO 
capabilities and readiness – including through improvements to our posture in Europe and our 
extended nuclear deterrence commitments – the Department will work with Allies bilaterally and 
through NATO’s established processes to better focus NATO capability development and military 
modernization to address Russia’s military threat. The approach will emphasize ready, 
interoperable combat power in contested environments across NATO forces, particularly air forces 
and other joint precision strike capabilities, and critical enablers such as intelligence, surveillance, 
and reconnaissance (ISR) and electronic warfare platforms. The Department will collaborate with 
Allies and partners to build capacity along Europe’s eastern flank, strengthening defensive anti-
area/access-denial capabilities and indications and warning; expanding readiness, training, and 
exercises; and promoting resilience, including against hybrid and cyber actions.  
The Middle East. As the Department continues to right-size its forward military presence in the 
Middle East following the mission transition in Afghanistan and continuing our “by, with, and 
through” approach in Iraq and Syria, we will address major security challenges in the region in 
effective and sustainable ways. The Joint Force will retain the ability to deny Iran a nuclear 
weapon; to identify and support action against Iranian and Iranian-backed threats; and to disrupt 
top-tier VEO threats that endanger the homeland and vital U.S. national interests. The Department 
will prioritize cooperation with our regional and global partners that results in their increased 
ability to deter and defend against potential aggression from Iran, for example by working to 
advance integrated air and missile defense, maritime security, and irregular warfare capabilities. 
Working in concert with global and interagency partners, the Department will redouble efforts to 
support regional security coalitions within the Gulf Cooperation Council and among states in the 
region to ensure maritime security and improve collective intelligence and warning.  
 
 
1 6  
2 0 2 2  N A T I O N A L  D E F E N S E  S T R A T E G Y  
Western Hemisphere. The United States derives immense benefit from a stable, peaceful, and 
democratic Western Hemisphere that reduces security threats to the homeland. To prevent distant 
threats from becoming a challenge at home, the Department will continue to partner with countries 
in the region to build capability and promote security and stability. We will maintain the ability to 
respond to crises and seek to strengthen regional roles and capabilities for humanitarian assistance, 
climate resilience, and disaster response efforts. As in all regions, the Department will work 
collaboratively, seeking to understand our partners’ security needs and areas of mutual concern. 
Africa. In Africa, the Department will prioritize disrupting VEO threats against the U.S. 
homeland and vital U.S. national interests, working “by, with, and through” our African partners 
to build states’ capability to degrade terrorist organizations and contribute broadly to regional 
security and stability. We will orient our approach on the continent towards security cooperation; 
increase coordination with Allies, multilateral organizations, and regional bodies that share these 
objectives; and support U.S. interagency initiatives in the region, including efforts to disrupt 
malign PRC and Russian activities on the continent.  
The Arctic. The United States seeks a stable Arctic region characterized by adherence to 
internationally-agreed upon rules and norms. The Department will deter threats to the U.S. 
homeland from and through the Arctic region by improving early warning and ISR capabilities, 
partnering with Canada to enhance North American Aerospace Defense Command capabilities, 
and working with Allies and partners to increase shared maritime domain awareness. U.S. 
activities and posture in the Arctic should be calibrated, as the Department preserves its focus on 
the Indo-Pacific region. 
 
 
1 7  
2 0 2 2  N A T I O N A L  D E F E N S E  S T R A T E G Y  
VII. FORCE PLANNING  
Sustaining and strengthening deterrence requires that the Department design, develop, and manage 
a combat-credible U.S. military fit for advancing our highest defense priorities. 
Building on the 2018 NDS, the 2022 NDS Force Planning Construct sizes and shapes the Joint 
Force to simultaneously defend the homeland; maintain strategic deterrence; and deter and, if 
necessary, prevail in conflict. To deter opportunistic aggression elsewhere, while the United States 
is involved in an all-domain conflict, the Department will employ a range of risk mitigation efforts 
rooted in integrated deterrence. These include coordination with and contributions of Allies and 
partners, deterrent effects of U.S. nuclear posture, and leveraging posture and capabilities not 
solely engaged in the primary warfight – for example, cyber and space. Additionally, the Joint 
Force will be shaped to ensure the ability to respond to small-scale, short-duration crises without 
substantially impairing high-end warfighting readiness, and to conduct campaigning activities that 
improve our position and reinforce deterrence while limiting or disrupting competitor activities 
that seriously affect U.S. interests. 
Our approach to force planning aims to build strength and capability in key operational areas. To 
maintain information advantage, the Department will improve our ability to integrate, defend, and 
reconstitute our surveillance and decision systems to achieve warfighting objectives, particularly 
in the space domain, and despite adversaries’ means of interference or deception. To preserve 
command, control, and communications in a fast-paced battlefield, we will make our network 
architectures more resilient against system-level exploitation and disruption so as to ensure 
effective coordination of distributed forces. To enhance our ability to deny aggression, we will 
improve the speed and accuracy of detection and targeting. To mitigate adversary anti-access/area-
denial capability, the Department will develop concepts and capabilities that improve our ability 
to reliably hold at risk those military forces and assets that are essential to adversary operational 
success, while managing escalation. For logistics and sustainment, we will reinforce our capability 
to quickly mobilize and deploy forces and to sustain high-intensity joint denial operations despite 
kinetic and non-kinetic attack and disruption. 
Achieving success in these operational areas requires tightly linking our concepts and capabilities 
for operating forces. The Department will continue to develop operational concepts that 
realistically expand U.S. options and constrain those of potential adversaries. The Department will 
explore force employment concepts and capabilities that degrade adversary power projection while 
weighing crisis stability and escalation risk; integrate new technologies; experiment with creative 
applications of existing capabilities; and selectively share the most effective asymmetric 
capabilities with threatened Allies and partners.  
 
1 8  
2 0 2 2  N A T I O N A L  D E F E N S E  S T R A T E G Y  
The Department’s force development and design program will integrate new operational concepts 
with the force attributes required to strengthen and sustain deterrence, and to prevail in conflict if 
necessary. The Department will prioritize a future force that is:  
► Lethal: Possesses anti-access/area-denial-insensitive strike capabilities that can penetrate 
adversary defenses at range.  
► Sustainable: Securely and effectively provides logistics and sustainment to continue 
operations in a contested and degraded environment, despite adversary disruption. 
► Resilient: Maintains information and decision advantage, preserves command, control, 
and communications systems, and ensures critical detection and targeting operations. 
► Survivable: Continues generating combat power to support strike capabilities and 
enablers for logistics and sustainment, despite adversary attacks. 
► Agile and Responsive: Rapidly mobilizes forces, generates combat power, and provides 
logistics and sustainment, even given adversary regional advantages and climate change 
impacts.  
The Joint Force will remain prepared to employ combat-ready forces on short notice to address 
aggression or crisis, an ability critical to strengthening deterrence. At the same time, the 
Department will make sure that day-to-day requirements to deploy and operate forces do not erode 
readiness for future missions, or bias investments towards extant but increasingly less effective 
capabilities at the expense of building capability and proficiency for advanced threats.  
The Department is establishing a new framework for strategic readiness, enabling a more 
comprehensive, data-driven assessment and reporting of readiness to ensure greater alignment with 
NDS priorities. To give the future Joint Force effective advocates today, current availability 
benchmarks and demands will be assessed against long-term force readiness, sustainability, 
recapitalization, and modernization objectives, in addition to priority threats and missions. 
Strategic readiness planning will take climate change impacts into account. 
 
 
 
 
1 9  
2 0 2 2  N A T I O N A L  D E F E N S E  S T R A T E G Y  
VIII. BUILDING ENDURING ADVANTAGES 
Building the future Joint Force that we need to advance the goals of this strategy requires broad 
and deep change in how we produce and manage military capability. U.S. competitors increasingly 
hold at risk our defense ecosystem – the Department, the defense industrial base, and the landscape 
of private sector and academic enterprises that innovate and support the systems on which the Joint 
Force depends. To construct an enduring foundation for our future military advantage, the 
Department – working in concert with other U.S. Federal departments and agencies, Congress, the 
private sector, and Allies and partners – will take swift action to affect change in five ways. 
On each dimension, the Department can and will leverage asymmetric American advantages: our 
entrepreneurial spirit; our diversity and pluralistic system of ideas and technology generation that 
drive unparalleled creativity, innovation, and adaptation; and our military’s combined-arms ethos 
and years of combat-tested operational and coalition experience. 
Transform the Foundation of the Future Force. Building the Joint Force called for by 
this strategy requires overhauling the Department’s force development, design, and business 
management practices. Our current system is too slow and too focused on acquiring systems not 
designed to address the most critical challenges we now face. This orientation leaves little 
incentive to design open systems that can rapidly incorporate cutting-edge technologies, creating 
longer-term challenges with obsolescence, interoperability, and cost effectiveness. The 
Department will instead reward rapid experimentation, acquisition, and fielding. We will better 
align requirements, resourcing, and acquisition, and undertake a campaign of learning to identify 
the most promising concepts, incorporating emerging technologies in the commercial and military 
sectors for solving our key operational challenges. We will design transition pathways to divest 
from systems that are less relevant to advancing the force planning guidance, and partner to equip 
the defense industrial base to support more relevant modernization efforts.  
Make the Right Technology Investments. The United States’ technological edge has long 
been a foundation of our military advantage. The Department will support the innovation 
ecosystem, both at home and in expanded partnerships with our Allies and partners. We will fuel 
research and development for advanced capabilities, including in directed energy, hypersonics, 
integrated sensing, and cyber. We will seed opportunities in biotechnology, quantum science, 
advanced materials, and clean-energy technology. We will be a fast-follower where market forces 
are driving commercialization of militarily-relevant capabilities in trusted artificial intelligence 
and autonomy, integrated network system-of-systems, microelectronics, space, renewable energy 
generation and storage, and human-machine interfaces. Because Joint Force operations 
increasingly rely on data-driven technologies and integration of diverse data sources, the 
Department will implement institutional reforms that integrate our data, software, and artificial 
intelligence efforts and speed their delivery to the warfighter. 
 
 
2 0  
2 0 2 2  N A T I O N A L  D E F E N S E  S T R A T E G Y  
Adapt and Fortify Our Defense Ecosystem. The Department will strengthen our defense 
industrial base to ensure that we produce and sustain the full range of capabilities needed to give 
U.S., allied, and partners forces a competitive advantage. We will bolster support for our 
unparalleled network of research institutions, both university-affiliated and federally-funded 
research and development centers, as well as small businesses and innovative technology firms. 
The Department will act urgently to better support advanced manufacturing processes (e.g., aircraft 
and ship building, preferred munition production) to increase our ability to reconstitute the Joint 
Force in a major conflict. We will work closely with Congress on reforms needed to accelerate 
these transitions. We will increase collaboration with the private sector in priority areas, especially 
with the commercial space industry, leveraging its technological advancements and 
entrepreneurial spirit to enable new capabilities. We will prioritize joint efforts with the full range 
of domestic and international partners in the defense ecosystem to fortify the defense industrial 
base, our logistical systems, and relevant global supply chains against subversion, compromise, 
and theft. 
Strengthen Resilience and Adaptability. Building enduring advantages also means having 
the elasticity and readiness in the defense ecosystem to adapt to emerging threats such as climate 
change. We will strengthen the Department’s ability to withstand and recover quickly from climate 
events. We will continue to analyze climate change impacts on the Joint Force, and will integrate 
climate change into threat assessments. We will increase resilience of military installations and at 
affected access and basing locations vital for deterrence and warfighting objectives. We will take 
climate extremes into account in decisions related to training and equipping the force. We will 
make reducing energy demand a priority, and seek to adopt more efficient and clean-energy 
technologies that reduce logistics requirements in contested or austere environments.  
Cultivate the Workforce We Need. People execute the strategy. To recruit and retain the 
most talented Americans, we must change our institutional culture and reform how we do business. 
The Department will attract, train, and promote a workforce with the skills and abilities we need 
to creatively solve national security challenges in a complex global environment.  
We will streamline and simplify hiring practices for both applicants and managers. We will offer 
competitive incentives, flexible work environments, and rotational assignments to better compete 
with the private sector. We will aggressively seek to fill specific technology gaps, including in 
cyber, data, and artificial intelligence specializations, and work with colleges and universities to 
help build our future workforce. The Department will encourage personnel to gain deep expertise 
not only about key technologies but also about our competitors and the future of warfare. In part 
by refocusing the curricula of Professional Military Education institutions, we will foster critical 
thinking and analytical skills, fluency in critical languages, and integration of insights from the 
social and behavioral sciences. We will increase the availability of fellowships, internships, and 
rotational assignments – including in the private sector – to grow the skills of our workforce, 
provide a broad range of experiences, create collaboration opportunities, and carry best practices 
back to the Department. 
 
2 1  
2 0 2 2  N A T I O N A L  D E F E N S E  S T R A T E G Y  
We will lead with our values. We will broaden our recruitment pool to reflect all of the United 
States, including traditionally marginalized communities and promoting a diversity of 
backgrounds and experiences to drive innovative solutions across the enterprise. And we will take 
care of our people, never sparing support for the health, safety, and welfare of service members 
and their families, as well as our civilian employees. 
Our efforts will ultimately fail if we allow problems in our own ranks to undermine our cohesion, 
performance, and ability to advance our mission. The Department will continue to take tangible 
steps to counter sexual assault and harassment across our Armed Forces. We will continue to work 
with Congress as critical changes are made, informed by the recommendations of the Independent 
Review Commission on Sexual Assault in the Military, to increase accountability; ensure we have 
a culture of zero tolerance for harassment and assault; enable active prevention, and support those 
who come forward. Finally, the Department will seek to eradicate all forms of extremism in our 
ranks. 
 
 
2 2  
2 0 2 2  N A T I O N A L  D E F E N S E  S T R A T E G Y  
IX. RISK MANAGEMENT 
No strategy will perfectly anticipate the threats we may face, and we will doubtless confront 
challenges in execution. This strategy shifts focus and resources toward the Department’s highest 
priorities, which will inevitably affect risk profiles in other areas. An NDS that is clear-eyed about 
this reality will help ensure that the Department effectively implements the strategy and assesses 
its impact over time. 
Foresight Risks. In developing this strategy, the Department considered the risks stemming 
from inaccurate predictions, including unforeseen shocks in the security environment. Chief 
among these: The rate at which a competitor modernizes its military, and the conditions under 
which competitor aggression manifests, could be different than anticipated. Our threat assessments 
may prove to be either over- or underestimated. We might fail to anticipate which technologies 
and capabilities may be employed and change our relative military advantage. A new pandemic or 
the impacts of climate change could impair operations or readiness. 
Foresight risks can be hedged and of course must be managed when they arise. Hedging options 
include continuing to exercise the Joint Force against multiple contingencies and developing new, 
more resource-efficient concepts of operation, in light of continuously updated intelligence and 
security assessments. 
Implementation Risks. This strategy will not be successful if we fail to resource its major 
initiatives or fail to make the hard choices to align available resources with the strategy’s level of 
ambition; if we do not effectively incorporate new technologies and identify, recruit, and leverage 
new talent; and if we are unsuccessful in reducing the barriers that limit collaboration with Allies 
and partners. We aim to mitigate these and other risks through ruthless prioritization. For example, 
we must not over-exert, reallocate, or redesign our forces for regional crises that cross the threshold 
of risk to preparedness for our highest strategic priorities. Implementation risks will be forestalled 
by leadership focus and discipline, as well as consistent attention to monitoring implementation in 
line with clear metrics to enable assessment and course correction. 
 
 
2 3  
2 0 2 2  N A T I O N A L  D E F E N S E  S T R A T E G Y  
X. CONCLUSION 
The United States is endowed with remarkable qualities that confer great advantages, including in 
the realm of national security. We are a free people devoted to democracy and the rule of law. Our 
combination of diversity, free minds, and free enterprise drives extraordinary innovation and 
adaptability. We are a member of an unparalleled and unprecedented network of alliances and 
partnerships. Together, we share many common values and a common interest in defending the 
stable and open international system, the basis for the most peaceful and prosperous epoch in 
modern history. 
We must not lose sight of these qualities and advantages. Our generational challenge is to combine 
and integrate them, developing our capabilities together with those of our Allies and partners to 
sustain and strengthen an international system under threat.  
This NDS has outlined the courses of action the Department of Defense will take to help meet this 
challenge. We are confident in success. Our country has faced and prevailed in multi-year 
competitions with major powers threatening or using force to subjugate others on more than one 
occasion in the past. Working in service of the American people, and in collaboration with our 
partners around the world, the men and women of our superbly capable Joint Force stand ready to 
do so again. 
 
 
 
2 4  
2 0 2 2  N A T I O N A L  D E F E N S E  S T R A T E G Y  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(This page left intentionally blank) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2022 Nuclear Posture Review 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I  
2 0 2 2  N U C L E A R  P O S T U R E  R E V I E W  
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
I. A COMPREHENSIVE, BALANCED APPROACH TO DEFENDING VITAL  
   NATIONAL SECURITY INTERESTS AND REDUCING NUCLEAR RISKS ....................... 1 
II. THE SECURITY ENVIRONMENT AND DETERRENCE CHALLENGES ......................... 4 
III. THE ROLE OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS  IN U.S. STRATEGY ............................................. 7 
IV. TAILORED NUCLEAR DETERRENCE STRATEGIES .................................................... 11 
V. STRENGTHENING REGIONAL NUCLEAR DETERRENCE ............................................ 14 
VI. ARMS CONTROL, NUCLEAR NON-PROLIFERATION,  
      AND COUNTERTERRORISM ............................................................................................. 16 
VII. U.S. NUCLEAR CAPABILITIES ........................................................................................ 20 
VIII. A RESILIENT AND ADAPTIVE NUCLEAR SECURITY ENTERPRISE ...................... 23 
IX. CONCLUSION....................................................................................................................... 25 
 
 
 
I I  
2 0 2 2  N U C L E A R  P O S T U R E  R E V I E W  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(This page left intentionally blank) 
 
 
1  
2 0 2 2  N U C L E A R  P O S T U R E  R E V I E W  
I. A COMPREHENSIVE, BALANCED APPROACH TO 
DEFENDING VITAL NATIONAL SECURITY INTERESTS 
AND REDUCING NUCLEAR RISKS  
This Nuclear Posture Review (NPR) describes United States nuclear strategy, policy, posture, and 
forces in support of the National Security Strategy (NSS) and National Defense Strategy (NDS). 
It reaffirms a continuing commitment to a safe, secure, and effective nuclear deterrent and strong 
and credible extended deterrence. Strategic deterrence remains a top priority mission for the 
Department of Defense (DoD) and the Nation.  For the foreseeable future, nuclear weapons will 
continue to provide unique deterrence effects that no other element of U.S. military power can 
replace. To deter aggression and preserve our security in the current security environment, we will 
maintain nuclear forces that are responsive to the threats we face.  
U.S. nuclear weapons deter aggression, assure allies and partners, and allow us to achieve 
Presidential objectives if deterrence fails. In a dynamic security environment, a safe, secure, and 
effective nuclear deterrent is foundational to broader U.S. defense strategy and the extended 
deterrence commitments we have made to allies and partners. Security architectures in the Euro-
Atlantic and Indo-Pacific regions are a critical U.S. strategic advantage over those governments 
that challenge the rules-based international order. These regional security architectures are a key 
pillar of the NDS; this NPR underscores the linkage between the conventional and nuclear 
elements of collective deterrence and defense.  
Deterrence alone will not reduce nuclear dangers. The United States will pursue a comprehensive 
and balanced approach that places a renewed emphasis on arms control, non-proliferation, and risk 
reduction to strengthen stability, head off costly arms races, and signal our desire to reduce the 
salience of nuclear weapons globally. Mutual, verifiable nuclear arms control offers the most 
effective, durable and responsible path to achieving a key goal: reducing the role of nuclear 
weapons in U.S. strategy. Despite the challenges in the current security environment, the United 
States will continue to pursue engagement with other nuclear-armed states where possible to 
reduce nuclear risks. We will do so with realistic expectations, understanding that progress requires 
reliable partners prepared to engage responsibly and on the basis of reciprocity, and with whom 
we can establish a degree of trust. 
Russia’s invasion of Ukraine underscores that nuclear dangers persist, and could grow, in an 
increasingly competitive and volatile geopolitical landscape. The Russian Federation’s 
unprovoked and unlawful invasion of Ukraine in 2022 is a stark reminder of nuclear risk in 
contemporary conflict. Russia has conducted its aggression against Ukraine under a nuclear 
shadow characterized by irresponsible saber-rattling, out of cycle nuclear exercises, and false 
narratives concerning the potential use of weapons of mass destruction (WMD). In brandishing 
Russia’s nuclear arsenal in an attempt to intimidate Ukraine and the North Atlantic Treaty 
Organization (NATO), Russia’s leaders have made clear that they view these weapons as a shield 
behind which to wage unjustified aggression against their neighbors. Irresponsible Russian 
2  
2 0 2 2  N U C L E A R  P O S T U R E  R E V I E W  
statements and actions raise the risk of deliberate or unintended escalation. Russia’s leadership 
should have no doubt regarding the resolve of the United States to both resist nuclear coercion and 
act as a responsible nuclear power.  
As long as nuclear weapons exist, the United States and other nuclear weapon states have a special 
charge to be responsible custodians of these nuclear capabilities and work with a sense of urgency 
to create a security environment that would ultimately allow for their elimination. Nuclear 
weapons have not been employed in more than 75 years. While ensuring our security, our goal is 
to extend this record of non-use and reduce the risk of a nuclear war that could have catastrophic 
effects for the United States and the world.  
Mindful of this imperative, in 2022 the leaders of the five declared Nuclear Weapon States (France, 
People’s Republic of China, Russian Federation, United Kingdom, United States (P5)) affirmed 
that a nuclear war cannot be won and must never be fought, and that nuclear weapons should serve 
defensive purposes, deter aggression, and prevent war. The P5 leaders also reaffirmed their 
commitment to their disarmament-related obligations under the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of 
Nuclear Weapons (NPT) and their intent to strengthen stability and prevent an arms race. Russia’s 
rhetoric and actions in Ukraine are inconsistent with and undermine this P5 statement. China also 
has a responsibility as an NPT nuclear weapons state and a member of the P5 to engage in talks 
that will reduce the risks of miscalculation and address destabilizing military dynamics. 
The United States is committed to the modernization of its nuclear forces, nuclear command, 
control, and communications (NC3) system, and production and support infrastructure, and to 
sustaining fielded systems through the transition to their replacements. Our principal competitors 
continue to expand and diversify their nuclear capabilities, to include novel and destabilizing 
systems, as well as non-nuclear capabilities that could be used to conduct strategic attacks. They 
have demonstrated little interest in reducing their reliance on nuclear weapons. By contrast, the 
United States is focused on the timely replacement of legacy fielded systems that are rapidly 
approaching their end of service life.  
The NPR identifies current or planned nuclear capabilities that are no longer required to meet our 
deterrence needs.  Additionally, consistent with its concept for integrated deterrence, DoD will 
seek to identify and assess the ability of non-nuclear capabilities to contribute to deterrence, and 
will integrate these capabilities into operational plans, as appropriate. While we are taking steps to 
advance the goal of reducing reliance on nuclear weapons, more far-reaching opportunities to 
move in this direction will require enduring improvement in the security environment, a 
commitment to verifiable arms control among the major nuclear powers, further progress in 
developing non-nuclear capabilities, and an assessment of how nuclear-armed competitors and 
adversaries may react. The United States is committed to making progress toward this goal as 
security, political, and technology conditions evolve in ways that allow us to do so.  
Meeting our nuclear policy goals would not be possible without a capable, motivated workforce. 
The military and civilian personnel who work every day in the nuclear enterprise are a national 
3  
2 0 2 2  N U C L E A R  P O S T U R E  R E V I E W  
asset whose accomplishments are rarely seen but vitally important. Preparing the next generation 
of deterrence and arms control leaders across the government and among Allies and partners is a 
critical task. We will sustain and strengthen activities to recruit, retain, and support the professional 
development of Service members and civilians working in and supporting the nuclear field.    
The 2022 NPR has made the following decisions to ensure a safe, secure, and effective deterrent 
while taking responsible steps to advance the goal of reducing the role of nuclear weapons in U.S. 
strategy. This approach offers a sound path toward sustained security and stable deterrence.  
► Adopt a strategy and declaratory policy that maintain a very high bar for nuclear 
employment while assuring Allies and partners, and complicating adversary decision 
calculus.  
► Adopt an integrated deterrence approach that works to leverage nuclear and non-nuclear 
capabilities to tailor deterrence under specific circumstances.   
► Eliminate “hedge against an uncertain future” as a formal role of nuclear weapons. 
► Take steps to strengthen extended deterrence and Allied assurance.  
► Pursue enhanced security through arms control, strategic stability, non-proliferation, and 
reducing the risks of miscalculation.  
► Affirm full-scope Triad replacement and other nuclear modernization programs, 
including NC3. 
► Retire the B83-1 gravity bomb. 
► Cancel the nuclear-armed Sea-Launched Cruise Missile (SLCM-N) program. 
► Deliver a modern, adaptive nuclear security enterprise based on an integrated strategy for 
risk management, production-based resilience, science and technology innovation, and 
workforce initiatives.    
 
 
4  
2 0 2 2  N U C L E A R  P O S T U R E  R E V I E W  
II. THE SECURITY ENVIRONMENT AND DETERRENCE 
CHALLENGES 
The NPR contributes to a broader strategic framework that recognizes the growing risk of military 
confrontation with or among nuclear powers and the urgent need to sustain and strengthen 
deterrence. In large part due to the actions of our strategic competitors, the international security 
environment has deteriorated in recent years. The People’s Republic of China (PRC) is the overall 
pacing challenge for U.S. defense planning and a growing factor in evaluating our nuclear 
deterrent. The PRC has embarked on an ambitious expansion, modernization, and diversification 
of its nuclear forces and established a nascent nuclear triad. The PRC likely intends to possess at 
least 1,000 deliverable warheads by the end of the decade.  
While the end state resulting from the PRC’s specific choices with respect to its nuclear forces and 
strategy is uncertain, the trajectory of these efforts points to a large, diverse nuclear arsenal with a 
high degree of survivability, reliability, and effectiveness. This could provide the PRC with new 
options before and during a crisis or conflict to leverage nuclear weapons for coercive purposes, 
including military provocations against U.S. Allies and partners in the region.  
Russia continues to emphasize nuclear weapons in its strategy, modernize and expand its nuclear 
forces, and brandish its nuclear weapons in support of its revisionist security policy. Its modern 
nuclear arsenal, which is expected to grow further, presents an enduring existential threat to the 
United States and our Allies and partners. For more than twenty years, Russia has pursued a wide-
ranging military modernization program that includes replacing legacy strategic nuclear systems 
and steadily expanding and diversifying nuclear systems that pose a direct threat to NATO and 
neighboring countries. This includes up to 1,550 accountable deployed warheads on strategic 
delivery vehicles that are limited by the New START Treaty, as well as nuclear forces that are not 
numerically constrained by any arms control treaty. For example, Russia has an active stockpile 
of up to 2,000 non-strategic nuclear warheads that is not treaty-limited. Similarly, Russia is 
pursuing several novel nuclear-capable systems designed to hold the U.S. homeland or Allies and 
partners at risk, some of which are also not accountable under New START.   
By the 2030s the United States will, for the first time in its history, face two major nuclear powers 
as strategic competitors and potential adversaries. This will create new stresses on stability and 
new challenges for deterrence, assurance, arms control, and risk reduction.  
The PRC and Russia are also working to augment their growing nuclear forces with a broader set 
of kinetic and non-kinetic capabilities, including cyber, space, information, and advanced 
conventional strike. Each seeks to integrate these multi-domain capabilities to support coercive 
strategies and enable military campaigns intended to present the Joint Force with operational 
dilemmas. The PRC and Russia also likely possess capabilities relevant to chemical and biological 
warfare that pose a threat to U.S., Allied, and partner forces, military operations, and civilian 
populations.  
5  
2 0 2 2  N U C L E A R  P O S T U R E  R E V I E W  
The Democratic People’s Republic of North Korea (North Korea), while not a rival on the same 
scale as the PRC and Russia, nonetheless also presents deterrence dilemmas for the United States 
and its Allies and partners. It poses a persistent threat and growing danger to the U.S. homeland 
and the Indo-Pacific region as it expands, diversifies, and improves its nuclear, ballistic missile, 
and non-nuclear capabilities, including its chemical weapon stockpile. A crisis or conflict on the 
Korean Peninsula could involve a number of nuclear-armed actors, raising the risk of broader 
conflict.  
Iran does not today possess a nuclear weapon and we currently believe it is not pursuing one. 
However, recent Iranian activities previously constrained by the Joint Comprehensive Plan of 
Action (JCPOA) are of great concern as they are applicable to a nuclear weapons program. U.S. 
policy is to prevent Iran from acquiring a nuclear weapon.  
The acquisition of nuclear weapons by additional states could lead to new challenges for 
deterrence. Developments in the security environment, including actions taken by Iran and North 
Korea, and Russia’s aggression against Ukraine, could create or deepen proliferation incentives. 
Additionally, nuclear terrorism continues to pose a threat to the United States and our Allies and 
partners. Terrorists remain interested in using WMD in attacks against U.S. interests and possibly 
the U.S. homeland. Dual-use knowledge, goods, and technology applicable to WMD continue to 
proliferate. 
The security environment poses a number of critical challenges for deterrence. 
The current and growing salience of nuclear weapons in the strategies and 
forces of our competitors heightens the risks associated with strategic 
competition and the stakes of crisis and military confrontation. As the NDS notes, 
we must be able to deter conventional aggression that has the potential to escalate to nuclear 
employment of any scale. Russia presents the most acute example of this problem today given 
its significantly larger stockpile of regional nuclear systems and the possibility it would use 
these forces to try to win a war on its periphery or avoid defeat if it was in danger of losing a 
conventional war. Deterring Russian limited nuclear use in a regional conflict is a high U.S. 
and NATO priority.  
The PRC’s nuclear expansion and the changes this could bring to its strategy 
present new complexities. In the near-term, we must factor this into our arms control and 
risk reduction approaches with Russia. We also recognize that as the security environment 
evolves, it may be necessary to consider nuclear strategy and force adjustments to assure our 
ability to achieve deterrence and other objectives for the PRC – even as we continue to do so 
for Russia. Our plans and capabilities must also account for the fact that the PRC increasingly 
will be able to execute a range of nuclear strategies to advance its goals.  
6  
2 0 2 2  N U C L E A R  P O S T U R E  R E V I E W  
Opportunistic aggression could create deterrence challenges. Should we find 
ourselves in a large-scale military confrontation with a major power or regional adversary, the 
Joint Force will need to be postured with military capabilities – including nuclear weapons – 
that can deter and defeat other actors who may seek to take advantage of this scenario to engage 
in opportunistic aggression. In such circumstances, we will also need to be prepared to fully 
leverage other instruments of national power and the capabilities our Allies and partners can 
bring to bear. 
Multi-domain stability challenges will grow. As all major powers develop multi-
domain approaches, the United States and our Allies and partners will face new dilemmas for 
deterrence and managing escalation risk. One challenge arises from advances in non-nuclear 
capabilities, including in the cyber, space, air, and undersea domains, that likely will create 
complex and unpredictable pathways for conflict escalation, especially where collective 
experience, common understandings, and established norms of behavior (such as cyber and 
space) are lacking. A related challenge is the lack of collective experience and potential limited 
understanding of the interplay between nuclear and non-nuclear strategic capabilities in 
shaping a crisis or conflict.     
 
7  
2 0 2 2  N U C L E A R  P O S T U R E  R E V I E W  
III. THE ROLE OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS  
IN U.S. STRATEGY 
Since the end of the Cold War, the United States has substantially reduced the size and diversity 
of its nuclear forces, narrowed the circumstances under which it would consider employing these 
forces, actively sought reciprocal force reductions with Russia, and made progress in global 
nonproliferation and risk reduction. Unlike some of its competitors, the United States will not use 
nuclear weapons to intimidate others or as part of an expansionist security policy. This policy of 
restraint continues to shape the role of nuclear weapons in U.S. strategy. The United States is 
committed to taking steps to reduce the role of nuclear weapons in our strategy as well as the risks 
of nuclear war, while also ensuring our strategic deterrent remains safe, secure, and effective, and 
our extended deterrence commitments remain strong and credible.  
The Role of Nuclear Weapons. The NPR affirms the following roles for nuclear weapons: 
► Deter strategic attacks; 
► Assure Allies and partners; and 
► Achieve U.S. objectives if deterrence fails. 
These roles are interrelated and complementary and provide the basis for developing and assessing 
our nuclear strategies, policies, and capabilities. “Hedging against an uncertain future” is no longer 
a stated role for nuclear weapons.  The United States will continue to carry out robust risk 
management strategies within the nuclear enterprise so that it is capable of delivering credible 
deterrence even in the face of significant uncertainties and unanticipated challenges. This requires 
sustaining a set of initiatives and actions in the nuclear enterprise that over time builds enduring 
advantage and resilience in our stockpile, production complex, and science and technology efforts. 
Our approach to mitigating programmatic, geopolitical, technological, and operational risk 
through a resilient and adaptive nuclear enterprise is discussed below.   
Deter Strategic Attacks. The United States affirms that its nuclear forces deter all forms of 
strategic attack. They serve to deter nuclear employment of any scale directed against the U.S. 
homeland or the territory of Allies and partners, whether on the ground, in the air, at sea, or in 
space. Any adversary use of nuclear weapons, regardless of location or yield, would fundamentally 
alter the nature of a conflict, create the potential for uncontrolled escalation, and have strategic 
effects. We must therefore be able to deter both large-scale and limited nuclear attacks from a 
range of adversaries. The capability to deter limited nuclear attacks is critical given that some 
competitors have developed strategies for warfare that may rely on the threat of nuclear escalation 
in order to terminate a conflict on advantageous terms. The ability to deter limited nuclear use is 
thus key to deterring non-nuclear aggression. If we are not confident we can deter escalation, it 
will be more difficult for our leaders to make the decision to project conventional military power 
to protect vital national security interests – and far more dangerous to do so should that decision 
be made.   
8  
2 0 2 2  N U C L E A R  P O S T U R E  R E V I E W  
Consistent with prior reviews, our nuclear strategy accounts for existing and emerging non-nuclear 
threats with potential strategic effect for which nuclear weapons are necessary to deter. We 
concluded that nuclear weapons are required to deter not only nuclear attack, but also a narrow 
range of other high consequence, strategic-level attacks. This is a prudent approach given the 
current security environment and how it could further evolve. 
Assure Allies and Partners. The NSS and NDS require strengthening security architectures 
in key regions in order to fully leverage the capabilities of Allies and partners to deter and, if 
necessary, defeat adversary aggression. The U.S. global alliance and partnership network is a 
military center of gravity.  U.S. extended nuclear deterrence is foundational to this network. Thus, 
assuring Allies and partners that these commitments are credible is central to U.S. national security 
and defense strategy.  
Allies must be confident that the United States is willing and able to deter the range of strategic 
threats they face, and mitigate the risks they will assume in a crisis or conflict.  
Modernizing U.S. nuclear forces is key to assuring Allies that the United States is committed and 
capable of deterring the range of threats U.S. nuclear strategy addresses. Extended nuclear 
deterrence contributes to U.S. non-proliferation goals by giving Allies and partners confidence that 
they can resist strategic threats and remain secure without acquiring nuclear weapons of their own. 
Part of our assurance to Allies and partners is a continued and strengthened commitment to arms 
control, nuclear nonproliferation, and nuclear risk reduction to improve collective security by 
reducing or constraining adversary capabilities. 
Achieve U.S. Objectives if Deterrence Fails. We will maintain a safe, secure, and effective 
nuclear deterrent and flexible nuclear capabilities to achieve our objectives should the President 
conclude that the employment of nuclear weapons is necessary. In such a circumstance, the United 
States would seek to end any conflict at the lowest level of damage possible on the best achievable 
terms for the United States and its Allies and partners. As part of NPR implementation, the United 
States will update nuclear weapons employment guidance in accordance with the policy and 
strategy established by the President following publication of this report.  
United States nuclear weapons employment guidance is approved by the President, and all nuclear 
plans are reviewed and approved by the Secretary of Defense. These plans are prepared with advice 
from the Chairman of the Joints Chiefs of Staff, among other senior officials. Legal advice is 
integral to the preparation of these documents and includes review of their consistency with the 
Law of Armed Conflict (LOAC), which is authoritatively stated for DoD personnel in the DoD 
Law of War Manual. Longstanding DoD policy is to comply with LOAC in all armed conflicts, 
however characterized, and the DoD Law of War Manual recognizes that “[t]he law of war governs 
the use of nuclear weapons, just as it governs the use of conventional weapons.” In addition, 
longstanding U.S. policy is to not purposely threaten civilian populations or objects, and the United 
States will not intentionally target civilian populations or objects in violation of LOAC. 
 
9  
2 0 2 2  N U C L E A R  P O S T U R E  R E V I E W  
Declaratory Policy. United States declaratory policy reflects a sensible and stabilizing 
approach to deterring a range of attacks in a dynamic security environment. This balanced policy 
maintains a very high bar for nuclear employment, while also complicating adversary decision 
calculus, and assuring Allies and partners. As long as nuclear weapons exist, the fundamental role 
of nuclear weapons is to deter nuclear attack on the United States, our Allies, and partners. The 
United States would only consider the use of nuclear weapons in extreme circumstances to defend 
the vital interests of the United States or its Allies and partners.  
The United States will not use or threaten to use nuclear weapons against non-nuclear weapon 
states that are party to the NPT and in compliance with their nuclear non-proliferation obligations. 
For all other states, there remains a narrow range of contingencies in which U.S. nuclear weapons 
may still play a role in deterring attacks that have strategic effect against the United States or its 
Allies and partners. 
Declaratory policy is informed by the threat, assessed adversary perceptions, Ally and partner 
perspectives, and our strategic risk reduction objectives. We conducted a thorough review of a 
broad range of options for nuclear declaratory policy – including both No First Use and Sole 
Purpose policies – and concluded that those approaches would result in an unacceptable level of 
risk in light of the range of non-nuclear capabilities being developed and fielded by competitors 
that could inflict strategic-level damage to the United States and its Allies and partners. Some 
Allies and partners are particularly vulnerable to attacks with non-nuclear means that could 
produce devastating effects. We retain the goal of moving toward a sole purpose declaration and 
we will work with our Allies and partners to identify concrete steps that would allow us to do so.  
Nuclear Weapons in U.S. Defense Strategy. While the United States maintains a very high 
bar for the employment of nuclear weapons, our nuclear posture is intended to complicate an 
adversary’s entire decision calculus, including whether to instigate a crisis, initiate armed conflict, 
conduct strategic attacks using non-nuclear capabilities, or escalate to the use of nuclear weapons 
on any scale. Our nuclear deterrent thus undergirds all our national defense priorities, including 
defending the U.S. homeland, deterring strategic attacks against the United States, our Allies and 
partners, and deterring regional aggression with emphasis on the PRC and Russia. Additionally, 
DoD’s goal to build a resilient defense ecosystem and Joint Force bears directly on our nuclear 
posture. Making the overall defense enterprise more resilient requires investing in the nuclear 
enterprise to ensure it is capable of responding in a timely way to changes in the security 
environment or challenges that arise in our nuclear force. 
We will deter through safe, secure, and effective nuclear forces that enable country-specific 
strategies and plans, extended deterrence commitments, and an integrated deterrence approach that 
incorporates suitable non-nuclear capabilities tailored to specific threat scenarios. This approach 
requires modernizing our nuclear forces, NC3, production infrastructure, and science and 
technology and industrial base; strengthening extended deterrence relationships; and reinforcing 
our nuclear forces with defenses against adversaries’ conventional, cyber, space, information, 
chemical, biological, radiological, and nuclear capabilities.  
1 0  
2 0 2 2  N U C L E A R  P O S T U R E  R E V I E W  
A key goal of integrated deterrence is to develop tailored options that shape adversary perceptions 
of benefits and costs. The role of nuclear weapons is well established and embedded in strategic 
deterrence policy and plans. Non-nuclear capabilities may be able to complement nuclear forces 
in strategic deterrence plans and operations in ways that are suited to their attributes and consistent 
with policy on how they are to be employed. A pragmatic approach to integrated deterrence will 
seek to determine how the Joint Force can combine nuclear and non-nuclear capabilities in 
complementary ways that leverage the unique attributes of a multi-domain set of forces to enable 
a range of deterrence options backstopped by a credible nuclear deterrent. Developing the needed 
operational and organizational concepts will take time and require additional research, evaluation, 
and experience. This will be a focus of NPR and NDS implementation.   
Another important element of integrated deterrence is better synchronizing nuclear and non-
nuclear planning, exercises, and operations. Our goal is to strengthen deterrence and raise the 
nuclear threshold of our potential adversaries in regional conflict by undermining adversary 
confidence in strategies for limited war that rely on the threat of nuclear escalation. When engaged 
in conventional operations against a nuclear-armed adversary the Joint Force must be able to 
survive, maintain cohesion, and continue to operate in the face of limited nuclear attacks. This 
form of resilience sends a distinct deterrence message to an adversary – that limited nuclear 
escalation will not render U.S., Allied, and partner forces incapable of achieving our warfighting 
aims. It is also critically important that the Joint Force can fight and win in a chemical, biological, 
radiological, and nuclear (CBRN)-contaminated environment. Further development of plans and 
force requirements to enable military operations in a nuclear environment will be a focus of NPR 
implementation, including requirements to ensure the resilience of conventional systems to limited 
nuclear use effects and enhanced mission assurance of space assets critical to conventional force 
operations.  
DoD also seeks to integrate its activities, operations, and strategies more widely and deeply with 
Allies and partners to signal to adversaries that that aggression will be met with a collective 
response. Greater engagement with Ally and partner forces adds uncertainty and complexity to 
adversary planning. An adversary may choose restraint if it believes it is challenging not just the 
United States but a unified alliance or coalition prepared to share risks, confront aggression, and 
impose prohibitive costs. Extended nuclear deterrence relationships play an important role here by 
operationalizing collective defense that couples U.S. and Allied security and gives Allies and 
partners the confidence to resist coercion and vigorously defend shared interests. Even as 
adversaries seek to decouple the United States and its Allies, the strength of these extended 
deterrence relationships conveys to them the risk that local aggression could widen, with 
potentially catastrophic consequences.  
 
1 1  
2 0 2 2  N U C L E A R  P O S T U R E  R E V I E W  
IV. TAILORED NUCLEAR DETERRENCE STRATEGIES 
Country-Specific Approaches. Central to U.S. deterrence strategy is the credibility of our 
nuclear forces to hold at risk what adversary leadership values most. Effectively deterring – and 
restoring deterrence if necessary – requires tailored strategies for potential adversaries that reflect 
our best understanding of their decision-making and perceptions.   
The PRC is increasing its capability to threaten the United States and our Allies and partners with 
nuclear weapons. The range of nuclear options available to the PRC leadership will expand in the 
years ahead, allowing it potentially to adopt a broader range of strategies to achieve its objectives, 
to include nuclear coercion and limited nuclear first use. We will maintain a flexible deterrence 
strategy and force posture that continues to clearly convey to the PRC that the United States will 
not be deterred from defending our Allies and partners, or coerced into terminating a conflict on 
unacceptable terms. Forces that provide this flexibility include the W76-2 low yield submarine-
launched ballistic missile warhead, globally-deployable bombers, dual-capable fighter aircraft, and 
air-launched cruise missiles. Our intent is to prevent the PRC from mistakenly concluding that it 
could gain advantage through any employment of nuclear weapons, however limited. The NPR 
recognizes that as the security environment evolves, changes in U.S. strategy and force posture 
may be required to sustain the ability to achieve deterrence, assurance, and employment objectives 
for both Russia and the PRC.  
Russia remains the U.S. rival with the most capable and diverse nuclear forces. Today it is unique 
in the combination of strategic and non-strategic nuclear forces it fields that enables nuclear 
employment ranging from large-scale attacks on the homeland to limited strikes in support of a 
regional military campaign. To deter large-scale attacks, we will field a modern, resilient nuclear 
Triad. To deter theater attacks and nuclear coercion of Allies and partners, we will bolster the Triad 
with capabilities that further strengthen regional deterrence, such as F-35A dual-capable fighter 
aircraft (DCA) equipped with the B61-12 bomb; the W76-2 warhead; and the Long-Range 
Standoff (LRSO) weapon. These flexible, tailorable capabilities are key to ensuring that Russia’s 
leadership does not miscalculate regarding the consequences of nuclear use on any scale, thereby 
reducing their confidence in both initiating conventional war against NATO and considering the 
employment of non-strategic nuclear weapons in such a conflict.  
The PRC and Russia are at different stages in their nuclear weapons development but each poses 
a major and growing nuclear threat to the United States and its Allies and partners. There is some 
opportunity to reduce the role of nuclear weapons in our strategies for the PRC and Russia in 
circumstances where the threat of a nuclear response may not be credible and where suitable non-
nuclear options may exist or may be developed. At the same time, we believe that major changes 
in the role of nuclear weapons in our strategies for the PRC and Russia will require verifiable 
reductions or constraints on their nuclear forces; otherwise the United States would assume 
unacceptable deterrence and assurance risks.   
1 2  
2 0 2 2  N U C L E A R  P O S T U R E  R E V I E W  
In a potential conflict with a competitor, the United States would need to be able to deter 
opportunistic aggression by another competitor. We will rely in part on nuclear weapons to help 
mitigate this risk, recognizing that a near-simultaneous conflict with two nuclear-armed states 
would constitute an extreme circumstance.  
Our strategy for North Korea recognizes the threat posed by its nuclear, chemical, missile, and 
conventional capabilities, and in particular the need to make clear to the Kim regime the dire 
consequences should it use nuclear weapons. Any nuclear attack by North Korea against the United 
States or its Allies and partners is unacceptable and will result in the end of that regime. There is 
no scenario in which the Kim regime could employ nuclear weapons and survive. Short of nuclear 
use, North Korea can also conduct rapid strategic attacks in East Asia. United States nuclear 
weapons continue to play a role in deterring such attacks.  Further, we will hold the regime 
responsible for any transfers it makes of nuclear weapons technology, material, or expertise to any 
state or non-state actor. 
Iran does not currently pose a nuclear threat but continues to develop capabilities that would enable 
it to produce a nuclear weapon should it make the decision to do so. The United States relies on 
non-nuclear overmatch to deter regional aggression by Iran as long as Iran does not possess nuclear 
weapons. It is U.S. policy that Iran will not be allowed to obtain a nuclear weapon. This policy has 
been consistent across successive administrations since the public disclosure of a clandestine 
Iranian nuclear program.   
Managing the Risks of Escalation and Miscalculation. Changes in the security 
environment and new capabilities – particularly in the cyber and space domains – will contribute 
in crisis or conflict to an increasingly complex operating environment. In this type of environment, 
deterring aggression and managing escalation will be more challenging. Accordingly, in 
developing and executing tailored deterrence strategies, we will follow guidelines for managing 
escalation risk. These guidelines will reflect general principles and approaches that favor crisis 
stability, such as architectural resilience and defenses that reduce first mover advantages in cyber 
and space; operational concepts and capabilities that provide options intended to limit escalation 
risk; and resilient, stress-tested weapon systems and command and control networks.  
Additionally, in crisis or conflict we will seek to manage escalation risk by addressing adversary 
misperceptions that may exist regarding U.S. resolve, capabilities, strategic intentions, or war aims 
that could lead to miscalculation. This can be accomplished through the way we posture our 
nuclear and non-nuclear forces, public and private messaging, and crisis communication and 
management mechanisms. It is equally important, in building operational plans and making 
decisions regarding nuclear posture and readiness, to reduce the risk that the United States will 
misinterpret adversary intentions or capabilities, or unknowingly cross a misunderstood or 
ambiguous threshold for adversary nuclear use. Intelligence analysis, simulations and wargames, 
“red teaming,” and other means offer actionable insights to U.S. leaders that help mitigate this risk.    
 
1 3  
2 0 2 2  N U C L E A R  P O S T U R E  R E V I E W  
Peacetime dialogue with potential adversaries can facilitate efforts in a crisis or war to reduce risks 
of misperception that could lead to escalation. Our goals in discussions on strategic stability 
include improving transparency and mutual understanding of threat perceptions, policies, doctrine, 
and capabilities, as well as establishing or enhancing crisis management processes that can help 
avoid or limit conflict escalation. The United States has substantial experience in strategic dialogue 
and crisis management with Russia, but has made little progress with the PRC despite consistent 
U.S. efforts. The world expects nuclear powers to act responsibly, including on risk reduction and 
crisis communications, and the United States will continue to pursue these efforts with China. 
We also recognize the risk of unintended nuclear escalation, which can result from accidental or 
unauthorized use of a nuclear weapon. The United States has extensive protections in place to 
mitigate this risk. As an example, U.S. intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBMs) are not on “hair 
trigger” alert. These forces are on day-to-day alert, a posture that contributes to strategic stability. 
Forces on day-to-day alert are subject to multiple layers of control, and the United States maintains 
rigorous procedural and technical safeguards to prevent misinformed, accidental, or unauthorized 
launch. Survivable and redundant sensors provide high confidence that potential attacks will be 
detected and characterized, enabling policies and procedures that ensure a deliberative process 
allowing the President sufficient time to gather information and consider courses of action. In the 
most plausible scenarios that concern policy leaders today, there would be time for full 
deliberation. For these reasons, while the United States maintains the capability to launch nuclear 
forces under conditions of an ongoing nuclear attack, it does not rely on a launch-under-attack 
policy to ensure a credible response. Rather, U.S. nuclear forces are postured to withstand an initial 
attack. In all cases, the United States will maintain a human “in the loop” for all actions critical to 
informing and executing decisions by the President to initiate and terminate nuclear weapon 
employment.  
As confidence- and security-building measures, the United States has taken steps over time to 
modify its nuclear posture to enhance stability. We continue to maintain our longstanding practice 
of open-ocean targeting of strategic nuclear forces day-to-day. Additionally, while we retain the 
capability to upload a portion of the ICBM force, we continue to configure these missiles with 
only one warhead day-to-day, thereby reducing adversary incentive to launch a first strike. Further 
“de-alerting” ICBMs or other steps to reduce alert levels could undermine crisis stability by 
heightening adversary incentives to attack or to increase nuclear readiness as a coercive measure.    
DoD will continue working to gain a deeper understanding of potential risks to crisis stability. In 
addition, as directed by the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2022, DoD will 
commission an independent review of the safety, security, and reliability of U.S. nuclear weapons, 
NC3, and integrated tactical warning/attack assessment systems.   
 
1 4  
2 0 2 2  N U C L E A R  P O S T U R E  R E V I E W  
V. STRENGTHENING REGIONAL NUCLEAR 
DETERRENCE  
As long as Allies and partners face nuclear threats, extended nuclear deterrence will remain a pillar 
of regional security architectures. Effective assurance of Allies and partners is built on a shared 
view of the security environment and deterrence challenges; a commitment to risk- and burden-
sharing; modern and effective nuclear forces; robust consultation processes; and Ally and partner 
confidence that the United States has the will and capability to meet its security commitments. 
Based on these principles, we will collaborate with Allies and partners to tailor extended deterrence 
and assurance policies that are responsive to the security environment and that integrate our 
collective capabilities across all tools of national power.  
Assurance also rests on a commitment to advance shared goals for arms control, non-proliferation, 
and other forms of risk reduction consistent with collective security interests. This includes 
identifying steps to reduce the risk of miscalculation that could lead to deliberate or inadvertent 
nuclear escalation. 
Strong and Credible Nuclear Deterrence in the Euro-Atlantic Region. As long as 
nuclear weapons exist, NATO will remain a nuclear alliance. A strong, cohesive Alliance with a 
clear nuclear mission remains essential to deter aggression and promote peace and stability in the 
Euro-Atlantic area, especially in light of Russia’s aggression against its neighbors and the central 
role nuclear weapons and other strategic capabilities play in Russian doctrine.   
United States strategic nuclear forces and forward-deployed nuclear weapons provide an essential 
political and military link between Europe and North America. Combined with the independent 
nuclear forces of France and the United Kingdom and NATO’s nuclear burden-sharing 
arrangements, U.S. nuclear forces remain essential to the Alliance’s deterrence and defense 
posture. Since Russia’s invasion of Ukraine and occupation of Crimea in 2014, NATO has taken 
steps to ensure a modern, ready, and credible NATO nuclear deterrent. This includes modernizing 
U.S. nuclear weapons forward-deployed in Europe and, with participating NATO Allies, 
transitioning to a new generation of fighter aircraft, including the U.S. F-35A Joint Strike Fighter. 
The United States will work with Allies concerned to ensure that the transition to modern DCA 
and the B61-12 bomb is executed efficiently and with minimal disruption to readiness.  
Further steps are needed to fully adapt these forces to current and emerging security conditions. 
We will work with Allies and partners to monitor Russian capabilities and doctrine and other 
aspects of the threat environment; enhance the readiness, survivability and effectiveness of the 
DCA mission across the conflict spectrum, including through enhanced exercises; strengthen the 
coherence of NATO’s nuclear and non-nuclear capabilities and concepts to ensure they are 
mutually supportive; and achieve the broadest possible participation in NATO’s nuclear burden-
sharing mission consistent with treaty commitments. Any changes in NATO’s nuclear posture will 
be taken only after a thorough review within – and decision by – the Alliance. 
1 5  
2 0 2 2  N U C L E A R  P O S T U R E  R E V I E W  
Strong and Credible Nuclear Deterrence in the Indo-Pacific Region. Our security 
commitments to Allies and partners in the Indo-Pacific region are steadfast. We recognize growing 
concerns about nuclear and missile developments in the PRC, North Korea, and Russia, and are 
committed to strengthening deterrence in ways that are responsive to changes in the regional 
security environment. Toward that end, we will work with Allies and partners to ensure an 
effective mix of capabilities, concepts, deployments, exercises, and tailored options to deter and, 
if necessary, respond to coercion and aggression.    
Foundational to this approach is stronger extended deterrence consultation emphasizing a 
cooperative approach between the United States and Allies in decision-making related to nuclear 
deterrence policy, strategic messaging, and activities that reinforce collective regional security. 
Building on the extended deterrence dialogues established over the last decade with the Republic 
of Korea (ROK), Japan and Australia, and other forums, we will identify pragmatic steps to 
enhance consultation. This could include periodically meeting at higher levels of seniority and 
examining options to improve crisis management consultation. An important goal is to identify 
opportunities for trilateral (United States, Japan, ROK) or quadrilateral (plus Australia) 
information sharing and dialogue. Relevant lessons-learned from dialogues and consultations 
should be directly factored into the development of tailored deterrence strategies and operational 
plans.   
The United States will continue to field flexible nuclear forces suited to deterring regional nuclear 
conflict, including the capability to forward deploy strategic bombers, dual-capable fighter aircraft, 
and nuclear weapons to the region and globally. We will work with Allies and partners to identify 
opportunities to increase the visibility of U.S. strategic assets to the region as a demonstration of 
U.S. resolve and commitment, including ballistic missile submarine port visits and strategic 
bomber missions. Greater capability integration is an important goal, as well – to better 
synchronize the nuclear and non-nuclear elements of deterrence and to leverage Ally and partner 
non-nuclear capabilities that can support the nuclear deterrence mission. In advancing these goals, 
we view the expertise, capabilities, and resources of our Allies and partners as “force multipliers” 
for strengthening deterrence.   
 
1 6  
2 0 2 2  N U C L E A R  P O S T U R E  R E V I E W  
VI. ARMS CONTROL, NUCLEAR NON-PROLIFERATION, 
AND COUNTERTERRORISM  
Beyond the critical role played by deterrence, arms control, risk reduction, and nuclear non-
proliferation play indispensable roles in further reducing nuclear dangers. Together, these are 
mutually reinforcing tools for preserving stability, deterring aggression and escalation, and 
avoiding arms racing and nuclear war. We are placing renewed emphasis on arms control, nuclear 
nonproliferation, and risk reduction. These policies complement U.S. nuclear policy and force 
structure decisions and enable us to pursue opportunities to reduce the role of nuclear weapons 
globally, enhance strategic stability with the PRC and Russia, and reduce the risks of war or 
escalation during war. In particular, limitations on and greater transparency into adversary nuclear 
and possibly non-nuclear strategic capabilities through arms control is central to any approach to 
reduce the role of nuclear weapons. Mutual, verifiable nuclear arms control offers the most 
effective, durable and responsible path to reduce the role of nuclear weapons in our strategy and 
prevent their use. Consistent with our commitment to put diplomacy first, the United States will 
pursue new arms control arrangements that address the full range of nuclear threats and advance 
our global non-proliferation interests.   
PRC and Russian actions to expand their nuclear arsenals make mutual and verifiable arms control 
challenging, but the United States will prepare for engagement and realistic outcomes in dialogues 
with both governments as this remains in our national security interest. We will seek opportunities 
to pursue practical steps to advance the goals of greater transparency and predictability, enhanced 
stability, reduced reliance on nuclear weapons and, ultimately, a world without nuclear weapons. 
Russia will remain a focus of U.S. efforts given the size, diversity, and continuing modernization 
of its nuclear arsenal. However, we will need to account for the PRC’s nuclear expansion in future 
U.S.-Russia arms control discussions. 
Nuclear Arms Control and Risk Reduction. Upon taking office in January 2021, the 
President immediately extended the New START Treaty for the full five-years provided in the 
Treaty. Extending verifiable limits on Russian intercontinental-range nuclear forces contributes to 
strategic stability and advances our defense priorities. We will continue to implement the Treaty 
and verify Russian compliance. Expiration of the Treaty without a follow-on agreement would 
leave Russia free to expand strategic nuclear forces that are now constrained, as well as novel 
intercontinental-range and regional systems that are not currently limited by the Treaty.  
The United States is ready to expeditiously negotiate a new arms control framework to replace 
New START when it expires in 2026, although negotiation requires a willing partner operating in 
good faith. Our priorities include fostering transparency and mutual risk reduction, pursuing 
initiatives that limit destabilizing systems or postures, and reducing the chance of miscalculation. 
Although the United States and Russia have expressed support for extending nuclear arms control 
beyond the New START Treaty, our priorities are not identical, underscoring the importance of 
1 7  
2 0 2 2  N U C L E A R  P O S T U R E  R E V I E W  
dialogue, when conditions permit, to address each side’s differing goals and perceptions of military 
systems that affect strategic stability.   
The scope and pace of the PRC’s nuclear expansion, as well as its lack of transparency and growing 
military assertiveness, raise questions regarding its intentions, nuclear strategy and doctrine, and 
perceptions of strategic stability. This underscores the need for discussions on practical steps to 
reduce strategic risks, including steps that that could lay the groundwork for additional discussion 
of mutual restraints in capabilities and behavior. Although the PRC has been reluctant to discuss 
these items, the United States remains ready to engage the PRC on a full range of strategic issues, 
with a focus on military de-confliction, crisis communications, information sharing, mutual 
restraint, risk reduction, emerging technologies, and approaches to nuclear arms control, among 
other issues. The United States remains prepared to meet with the PRC in bilateral and multilateral 
fora while pressing for these discussions to include both sides’ military and diplomatic authorities.  
Engagement with the PRC should address its plans for expanding fissile material production to 
support its growing nuclear arsenal. The PRC should adopt a moratorium on fissile material 
production or, at a minimum, provide increased transparency to assure the international 
community that fissile material produced for civilian purposes is fully accounted for and not 
diverted to military uses. We will make clear to the international community our concerns 
regarding the PRC’s growing nuclear arsenal, and ensure outreach to the PRC is consistent with 
our security commitments to allies and partners.   
Successfully enforcing future arms control agreements will require new technical capabilities for 
verification and monitoring (V&M). The United States is already investing in some of the needed 
technologies, but additional resource prioritization may be required to ensure they will be available 
when needed. Our participation in several international collaborations (e.g., International 
Partnership for Nuclear Disarmament Verification) advances the technical basis for innovation in 
V&M. To support our long-term arms control, non-proliferation, and disarmament goals, we are 
committed to developing the next generation of policy and technical experts needed to negotiate 
and implement future agreements.  
Nuclear Non-Proliferation. The United States remains dedicated to preserving and 
strengthening the nuclear non-proliferation regime and reaffirms its commitment to the NPT. The 
NPT has made the world safer and more prosperous, and all Parties, including the United States 
and its Allies and partners, continue to benefit from the Treaty. The International Atomic Energy 
Agency (IAEA) and its nuclear safeguards system, including the Additional Protocol, as well as 
effective international export controls, impede nuclear proliferation and should be strengthened. 
U.S. actions to “pursue negotiations in good faith on effective measures relating to nuclear 
disarmament” advance U.S. national security in their own right but also build international 
confidence in the broader benefits of the nuclear non-proliferation regime. The United States will 
continue to pursue political and technological barriers to nuclear proliferation, including through 
strengthened strategic trade controls and support for the adoption of nuclear weapon-free zones. 
1 8  
2 0 2 2  N U C L E A R  P O S T U R E  R E V I E W  
We will also continue to support efforts that enable all NPT States Parties to enjoy the benefits of 
peaceful nuclear technology.  
U.S. policy is to prevent Iran from obtaining a nuclear weapon, and is pursuing principled 
diplomacy in coordination with Allies and partners to constrain Iran’s nuclear activities.  Further, 
we support measures to limit Iranian nuclear activities applicable to a nuclear weapons program 
and to provide the greatest possible level of international transparency and verification.  
Our policy toward North Korea calls for a calibrated diplomatic approach to secure practical 
progress that increases the security of the United States, our Allies and partners, and deployed 
forces. At the same time, we will continue to press North Korea to comply with its obligations 
under various United Nations Security Council resolutions and return to negotiations to verifiably 
eliminate its nuclear program.  With respect to reducing or eliminating the threat from North 
Korea, our goal remains the complete and verifiable denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula.  
Multilateral Arms Control and Disarmament. The P5 Process promotes dialogue on 
nuclear issues that could build confidence and understanding, enhance transparency, and create a 
forum for high-level engagement. Future efforts could be tailored to deepen engagement on 
nuclear doctrines, concepts for strategic risk reduction, and nuclear arms control verification. 
The United States supports the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT) and is committed 
to working to achieve its entry into force, recognizing the significant challenges that lie ahead in 
reaching this goal. In the near term, we continue to support the Preparatory Commission for the 
CTBT Organization; the completion and provisional operation of the International Monitoring 
System and International Data Centre; and development of the on-site inspection regime so that it 
will be capable of carrying out its compliance verification mission once the Treaty enters into 
force.    
Once in force, the CTBT would ban nuclear explosive tests of any yield. Under the CTBT there is 
no threshold of nuclear yield below which nuclear explosive tests are permissible. If the CTBT 
were to enter into force, Russia and the PRC would have an obligation to comply with the Treaty’s 
“zero-yield” standard. The United States will engage with Russia and the PRC, as appropriate, in 
order to address nuclear test site activities of concern relative to the Treaty, as outlined in the 
Department of State’s Compliance Report. Those concerns do not outweigh the security benefits 
of the Treaty; indeed, the Treaty’s benefits would include a legally binding basis and tools for 
challenging that behavior. Consistent with the goals of the CTBT, the United States continues to 
observe a moratorium on nuclear explosive testing and calls on all states possessing nuclear 
weapons to declare or maintain such a moratorium. The Department of Energy’s National Nuclear 
Security Administration (NNSA) stockpile stewardship program enables the United States to 
ensure a safe, secure, and effective nuclear deterrent without requiring a return to nuclear explosive 
testing. This helps advance U.S. non-proliferation objectives and sets a responsible example for 
all nuclear weapons states 
1 9  
2 0 2 2  N U C L E A R  P O S T U R E  R E V I E W  
A Fissile Material Cutoff Treaty (FMCT) would ban the production of fissile material for use in 
nuclear weapons and remains a key element of the global non-proliferation and disarmament 
agenda. The United States continues to support the commencement of FMCT negotiations, 
provided they are governed by consensus and all key states participate. In the interim, we remain 
committed to maintaining our unilateral moratorium on the production of fissile material for use 
in nuclear weapons, which has been in place since the early 1990s. We continue to encourage all 
states that have not yet done so, including the PRC, to declare and maintain such a moratorium 
immediately.    
While the United States actively pursues the goal of a world without nuclear weapons, it does not 
consider the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons (TPNW) to be an effective means to 
reach that goal. The United States does not share the underlying assumption of the TPNW that the 
elimination of nuclear weapons can be achieved irrespective of the prevailing international security 
environment. Nor do we consider the TPNW to be an effective tool to resolve the underlying 
security conflicts that lead states to retain or seek nuclear weapons.  
Nuclear Counterterrorism. Preventing an act of nuclear terrorism is an enduring national 
security requirement. We will continue to work through diplomacy and partnerships to advance 
the core elements of our nuclear counterterrorism strategy: denying non-state actors access to 
nuclear materials and related technology; improving forensic capabilities to identify the origin of 
nuclear material outside of regulatory control or used in a nuclear device; monitoring and 
disrupting terrorist attempts to obtain nuclear capabilities; and, maintaining an incident response 
posture to detect, interdict, and defeat nuclear threats or minimize the consequence of nuclear 
events.  
This strategy contributes to the deterrence of both non-state actors and hostile states that might 
contemplate providing nuclear material or other assistance to would-be nuclear terrorists, and 
provides for response options should deterrence fail. Deterring states from facilitating acts of 
nuclear terrorism by others is enabled in part by nuclear forensic capabilities that provide the 
scientific basis to hold such states accountable. Greater investment in these technical nuclear 
forensic tools is required to ensure they remain responsive to the threat, and thus scientifically 
credible and internationally accepted.  
 
2 0  
2 0 2 2  N U C L E A R  P O S T U R E  R E V I E W  
VII. U.S. NUCLEAR CAPABILITIES  
The United States will field and maintain strategic nuclear delivery systems and deployed weapons 
in compliance with New START Treaty central limits as long as the Treaty remains in force. We 
will continue to deploy a nuclear triad and are fully committed to the programs that will begin to 
field modernized systems later this decade. Programs are also being executed to modernize U.S. 
DCA, the nuclear weapons stockpile, the NC3 architecture, and the weapons production 
infrastructure.   
The three legs of the nuclear Triad are complementary, with each component offering unique 
attributes. Maintaining a modern triad possessing these attributes – effectiveness, responsiveness, 
survivability, flexibility, and visibility – ensures that the United States can withstand and respond 
to any strategic attack, tailor its deterrence strategies as needed, and assure Allies in support of our 
extended deterrence commitments. 
While the U.S. nuclear arsenal remains safe, secure, and effective, most nuclear deterrent systems 
are operating beyond their original design life. Replacement programs are on track at this time, but 
there is little or no margin between the end of effective life of existing systems and the fielding of 
their replacements. These replacement programs are planned to deliver modernized capabilities to 
avoid any gaps in our ability to field a credible and effective deterrent.  
The B83-1 gravity bomb will be retired due to increasing limitations on its capabilities and rising 
maintenance costs. In the near-term, we will leverage existing capabilities to hold at risk hard and 
deeply buried targets. DoD, working with its interagency partners and informed by existing 
concepts, will develop an enduring capability for improved defeat of such targets. 
In addition, we are cancelling the nuclear-armed Sea-Launched Cruise Missile (SLCM-N) 
program. The 2018 NPR introduced SLCM-N and the W76-2 to supplement the existing nuclear 
program of record in order to strengthen deterrence of limited nuclear use in a regional conflict. 
We reassessed the rationale for these capabilities and concluded that the W76-2 currently provides 
an important means to deter limited nuclear use. Its deterrence value will be re-evaluated as the F-
35A and LRSO are fielded, and in light of the security environment and plausible deterrence 
scenarios we could face in the future. We concluded SLCM-N was no longer necessary given the 
deterrence contribution of the W76-2, uncertainty regarding whether SLCM-N on its own would 
provide leverage to negotiate arms control limits on Russia’s NSNW, and the estimated cost of 
SLCM-N in light of other nuclear modernization programs and defense priorities. 
 
2 1  
2 0 2 2  N U C L E A R  P O S T U R E  R E V I E W  
 
 
2 2  
2 0 2 2  N U C L E A R  P O S T U R E  R E V I E W  
Strengthening Nuclear Command, Control, and Communications (NC3). Our NC3 
system must provide command and control of U.S. nuclear forces at all times and under all 
circumstances, including during and following a nuclear or non-nuclear attack by any adversary. 
Resilient NC3 capabilities are a critical enabler of mission assurance for nuclear operations. The 
five essential functions for nuclear command and control are detection, warning and attack 
characterization; adaptive nuclear planning; decision-making conferencing; receiving and 
executing Presidential orders; and enabling the management and direction of forces.   
We will employ an optimized mix of resilience approaches to protect the next-generation NC3 
architecture from threats posed by competitor capabilities. This includes, but is not limited to, 
enhanced protection from cyber, space-based, and electro-magnetic pulse threats; enhanced 
integrated tactical warning and attack assessment; improved command post and communication 
links; advanced decision support technology; and integrated planning and operations.     
Technology Innovation for the Nuclear Enterprise. A stronger and more systematic 
approach to technology innovation is key to building enduring advantage in the nuclear enterprise. 
This requires investing in new research, prototyping, and engineering efforts that can be leveraged 
as needed to ensure a safe, secure, and effective nuclear deterrent into the future. The nuclear 
enterprise will increase focus on research, development, test, and evaluation efforts; government 
purpose data rights; and faster development of technologies and system concepts through digital 
engineering and open architecture designs, for example. Development activities will emphasize a 
robust experimental approach to the use of emerging technologies and innovative design practices 
to promote competition of concepts, accelerate technology readiness, bolster the critical 
workforce, and help leadership understand technology opportunities. This multi-faceted approach 
will promote technology-based resilience and will reduce the risks associated with developing or 
adapting future nuclear deterrent capabilities.  
Stockpile Certification. Since 1992, the United States has maintained a moratorium on nuclear 
explosive testing and remains committed to assuring the safety, security and reliability of our 
arsenal through a rigorous science-based stockpile stewardship program. For more than twenty 
years, the Secretaries of Defense and Energy, the directors of the national security laboratories, 
and the Commanders of U.S. Strategic Command (USSTRATCOM) have annually assessed that 
our nuclear stockpile is safe, reliable, and effective, and that there is no current need to conduct 
nuclear explosive tests to ensure stockpile reliability. As nuclear warhead system lifetimes are 
extended, the NNSA and USSTRATCOM required assessments and certifications of warhead 
systems are increasingly challenged by limited surveillance hardware and testing opportunities. 
Additionally, if any issues are observed through surveillance activities and tests, the capacity of 
the production infrastructure to make necessary changes can interrupt other planned modernization 
programs. Therefore, the United States maintains a nuclear explosive test readiness program in the 
event it is required to resolve technical uncertainties. The United States does not envision or desire 
a return to nuclear explosive testing.  Any resumption of nuclear testing would occur only at the 
President’s explicit direction.   
2 3  
2 0 2 2  N U C L E A R  P O S T U R E  R E V I E W  
VIII. A RESILIENT AND ADAPTIVE NUCLEAR 
SECURITY ENTERPRISE 
For most of the post-Cold War period, the focus of our nuclear security enterprise has been to 
sustain existing nuclear weapons and improve our ability to assess their safety, security, reliability, 
and effectiveness without nuclear explosive testing. When aging issues were identified in the 
stockpile, weapons were partially refurbished without changing their military characteristics, and 
safety and security systems were sometimes upgraded. Elements of the production infrastructure 
were dismantled and other elements were not sustained.   
Today, much of the stockpile has aged without comprehensive refurbishment. At a time of rising 
nuclear risks, a partial refurbishment strategy no longer serves our interests. A safe, secure, and 
effective deterrent requires modern weapons and a modern infrastructure, enabled by a world-class 
workforce equipped with modern tools. We must develop and field a balanced, flexible stockpile 
capable of pacing threats, responding to uncertainty, and maintaining effectiveness. To accomplish 
this, we must re-establish, repair, and modernize our production infrastructure, and ensure it has 
appropriate capabilities and sufficient capacity to build and maintain modern nuclear weapons in 
a timely manner. The nuclear security enterprise must be able to respond in a timely way to threat 
developments and technology opportunities, maintain effectiveness over time, and at all times 
ensure that Presidential guidance can be achieved.  
This plan has three pillars. First, given the complexity and interconnected nature of ongoing 
nuclear modernization and sustainment programs, DoD and NNSA will improve coordination and 
integration. DoD and NNSA will develop and implement a Nuclear Deterrent Risk Management 
Strategy to identify, prioritize, and recommend actions across the portfolio of nuclear programs 
and monitor the overall health of the nuclear deterrent as we sustain current capabilities and 
transition to modernized systems. This strategy will be informed by ongoing assessment of the 
security environment and early identification of potential risks, with the goal of enhancing senior 
leader visibility and framing options for risk mitigation.   
Second, NNSA will institute a Production-based Resilience Program (PRP) to complement the 
science-based stewardship program and ensure that the nuclear security enterprise is capable of 
full-scope production. The PRP will establish the capabilities and infrastructure that can efficiently 
produce weapons required in the near-term and beyond, and that are sufficiently resilient to adapt 
to additional or new requirements should geopolitical or technology developments warrant. Key 
attributes are flexibility, supply chain security and resilience, production capacity margin, and 
elimination of single point failures. The PRP will enable more regular and timely incorporation of 
advanced technologies to improve safety, security, and reliability; accommodate arms control 
considerations as design features as weapons and infrastructure are modernized; and enable 
improved stockpile management and risk mitigation without overreliance on single warhead types, 
a large reserve stockpile, or increases to the size of the stockpile. 
2 4  
2 0 2 2  N U C L E A R  P O S T U R E  R E V I E W  
The PRP will address all elements of the enterprise including production of primaries, secondaries, 
tritium, and non-nuclear components; domestic uranium enrichment; and system assembly and 
disassembly. For primary production, the highest priority for the next ten years is pit production, 
a capability lost when the Rocky Flats facility was closed in 1992. Restoring the ability to produce 
plutonium pits for primaries will guard against the uncertainties of plutonium aging in today’s 
stockpile and will also allow new pit designs to be manufactured if necessary for future weapons. 
The two-site strategy at Los Alamos National Laboratory and the Savannah River Site will 
eliminate single point failure and provide flexible capacity options. Priorities for secondary 
production are completion and full operation of the Uranium Processing Facility, as well as 
depleted uranium and lithium facilities modernization. Modernizing tritium production will assure 
a reliable and resilient domestic source and options for longer stockpile life tritium components. 
Modernizing development and production capabilities of high explosives and energetic materials 
will eliminate single points of failure. Modernizing production capacity for non-nuclear 
components encompasses items such as strategic radiation-hardened microelectronics, component 
test capabilities, and sufficient manufacturing floor space.   
Third, NNSA will establish a Science and Technology Innovation Initiative to accelerate the 
integration of science and technology (S&T) throughout its activities. This initiative will add to 
the existing science portfolio an increased focus on leveraging S&T to support the weapon design 
and production phases and modernize the production complex. The goal is to more rapidly 
assimilate findings from academic, commercial, and internal research and thereby reduce the time 
and cost required to design and produce weapons with the most modern technologies that are most 
responsive to potential threats. This initiative will include new and replacement science facilities. 
Additionally, NNSA will partner closely with DoD’s S&T community as both pursue activities to 
foster and exercise the national technology base. 
The health of the enterprise depends critically on recruiting and retaining a skilled and diverse 
workforce. We will place priority on programs and policies to ensure the nuclear security 
enterprise can attract and retain talent and conduct effective knowledge transfer. Building a 
resilient and adaptive enterprise will take time. There is no quick fix, but with sustained national 
commitment, a sound strategy, and a 21st century workforce, we will maintain a safe, secure, and 
effective nuclear deterrent for as long as necessary.  
 
2 5  
2 0 2 2  N U C L E A R  P O S T U R E  R E V I E W  
   IX. CONCLUSION 
In an increasingly complex security environment, we are committed to ensuring a safe, secure, and 
effective nuclear deterrent, and strong and credible extended deterrence – a posture that contributes 
to stability and supports the broader objectives of our National Defense Strategy. This includes a 
commitment to responsible stewardship of our nuclear weapons, constructive collaboration with 
our Allies and partners, pragmatic approaches to arms control and non-proliferation, and 
responsible technology innovation that enhances stability.  We fully recognize the enduring 
importance of a nuclear policy that balances the evolving demands of deterrence with our goal of 
taking steps to reduce the role of nuclear weapons in our national security strategy, and thereby 
reducing the salience of nuclear weapons globally. We will work with a sense of urgency to reduce 
the danger of nuclear war, which would have catastrophic consequences for the United States and 
the world. Developments in the security environment make these goals both more challenging and 
more pressing to pursue. However, we can only make progress in these respects if we are confident 
in the ability of our nuclear posture to deter aggression and protect our Allies and partners. Thus, 
for the foreseeable future, nuclear weapons will continue to provide unique deterrence effects that 
no other element of U.S. military power can replace.  To deter aggression and preserve our security 
in the current security environment, we will maintain a nuclear posture that is responsive to the 
threats we face. 
 
 
2 6  
2 0 2 2  N U C L E A R  P O S T U R E  R E V I E W  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(This page left intentionally blank) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2022 Missile Defense Review 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I  
2 0 2 2  M I S S I L E  D E F E N S E  R E V I E W  
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
I. INTRODUCTION ....................................................................................................................... 1 
II. EVOLVING AIR AND MISSILE THREAT ENVIRONMENT .............................................. 2 
III. STRATEGY AND POLICY FRAMEWORK .......................................................................... 5 
IV. STRENGTHENING INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION  
      WITH ALLIES AND PARTNERS ........................................................................................ 10 
V. CONCLUSION ........................................................................................................................ 12 
 
 
 
 
 
I I  
2 0 2 2  M I S S I L E  D E F E N S E  R E V I E W  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(This page left intentionally blank) 
 
 
 
 
1  
2 0 2 2  M I S S I L E  D E F E N S E  R E V I E W  
I. INTRODUCTION 
The 2022 Missile Defense Review (MDR) provides direction to the Department of Defense (DoD) 
and guidance to its interagency partners on U.S. missile defense strategy and policy in support of 
the National Defense Strategy (NDS).  The MDR provides a framework for U.S. missile defenses 
that is informed by: defense priorities and deterrence objectives as indicated in the NDS; the 
framework of integrated deterrence; and the multifaceted elements of U.S. missile defenses.  The 
MDR also identifies how the United States is integrating missile defense with its Allies and 
partners to strengthen international cooperation against shared threats. 
Since the release of the last MDR in 2019, missile-related threats have rapidly expanded in 
quantity, diversity, and sophistication.  U.S. national security interests are increasingly at risk from 
wide-ranging missile arsenals that include offensive ballistic, cruise, and hypersonic weapons, as 
well as lower-tier threats such as Uncrewed Aircraft Systems (UAS). 
The United States will continue to rely on strategic deterrence – underwritten by a safe, secure, 
and effective nuclear arsenal, and reinforced by a resilient sensor and Nuclear Command, Control 
and Communications (NC3) architecture – to address and deter large intercontinental-range, 
nuclear missile threats to the homeland from the People’s Republic of China (PRC) and the 
Russian Federation (Russia).  As the scale and complexity of the Democratic People’s Republic 
of Korea (North Korea) missile capabilities increase, the United States will also continue to stay 
ahead of North Korean missile threats to the homeland through a comprehensive missile defeat 
approach, complemented by the credible threat of direct cost imposition through nuclear and non-
nuclear means. 
Missile defeat encompasses the range of activities to counter the development, acquisition, 
proliferation, potential and actual use of adversary offensive missiles of all types, and to limit 
damage from such use.  In support of the homeland missile defense mission, continued 
modernization and expansion of the Ground-based Midcourse Defense (GMD) system will remain 
an essential element of our comprehensive missile defeat approach.  In addition, as part of this 
comprehensive approach, the United States will also continue to improve defensive capabilities to 
address the threat of evolving cruise missile strikes by any adversary against the homeland. 
To strengthen regional defense and deterrence, close cooperation with Allies and partners on 
Integrated Air and Missile Defense (IAMD) will remain an important priority.  As such, the United 
States will continue to pursue Joint, Allied and partner IAMD capabilities needed to maintain a 
credible level of regional defensive capability for joint maneuver forces and critical infrastructure 
against all missile threats from any adversary in order to protect U.S. forces abroad, maintain 
freedom of maneuver, and strengthen security commitments to our Allies and partners. 
 
 
2  
2 0 2 2  M I S S I L E  D E F E N S E  R E V I E W  
II. EVOLVING AIR AND MISSILE THREAT 
ENVIRONMENT 
Adversaries are developing, fielding, and integrating more advanced air and missile capabilities 
into their strategies in order to favorably shape the course of a potential crisis or conflict.  These 
air and missile capabilities pose an expanding and accelerating risk to the U.S. homeland, U.S. 
forces abroad, and our Allies and partners. 
Current and emerging ballistic, cruise, and hypersonic missile capabilities, as well as new threats 
such as small Uncrewed Aircraft Systems (sUAS), are complicating the traditional roles of air and 
missile defense.  Potential adversaries are acquiring longer-range and more complex missiles, and 
are seeking meaningful military advantage with advanced conventional missiles, enabled by 
sophisticated information systems and sensors.  Threat actors are developing and deploying mobile 
missile systems to reduce the ability of the United States, Allies, and partners to detect, identify, 
and respond to launch preparations.  Hypersonic weapons, designed to evade U.S. sensors and 
defensive systems, pose an increasing and complex threat due to their dual (nuclear/conventional) 
capable nature, challenging flight profile, and maneuverability. 
PRC. As outlined in the NDS, PRC efforts and activities to contest the rules-based international 
order make it the pacing challenge for the Department.  Over the past two decades, the PRC has 
dramatically advanced its development of conventional and nuclear-armed ballistic and hypersonic 
missile technologies and capabilities, through intense and focused investment, development, 
testing, and deployments.  The PRC currently utilizes Russian-developed air and missile defense 
systems while also pursuing indigenous capabilities that are growing in sophistication.  In many 
areas such as conventional ballistic and hypersonic missile technologies, the PRC continues to 
close the gap with the United States, and will likely continue to develop and expand its missile 
capabilities.  Increasingly sophisticated and proliferated space-based Intelligence, Surveillance, 
and Reconnaissance (ISR) networks, and improved Command and Control (C2) systems, have 
greatly improved the precision and accuracy of missile systems the PRC would employ to deter 
and counter U.S. forward presence and operations, especially in the Western Pacific region. 
Russia. The unprovoked Russian invasion of Ukraine clearly signals the re-emergence of a more 
militaristic Russia that seeks to overturn the post-Cold War European security system and 
challenge the broader rules-based international order.  Through its hostile actions, Russia seeks to 
expand its control over portions of the former Soviet empire in order to reclaim what it regards as 
its rightful position on the world stage.  In Ukraine, Russia has used thousands of air, land, and 
sea-launched cruise and ballistic missiles, including hypersonic missiles.  Current battlefield losses 
threaten to reduce Russia’s modernized weapons arsenal, and coordinated and wide-ranging 
economic sanctions and export controls may hinder its future ability to effectively produce modern 
precision-guided munitions. 
 
 
3  
2 0 2 2  M I S S I L E  D E F E N S E  R E V I E W  
As noted in the NDS, Russia also seeks to advance its interests by directly challenging U.S. 
national interests.  Over the last 10 years, Russia has prioritized modernization of its 
intercontinental range missile systems and is developing, testing, and deploying new, diversified 
capabilities that pose new challenges to missile warning and defense of the U.S. homeland.  Russia 
is developing and fielding a suite of advanced precision-strike missiles that can be launched from 
multiple air-, sea-, and ground-based platforms, and feature many capabilities designed to defeat 
missile defenses.  Russia has retained and upgraded its own missile defense system designed to 
protect Moscow against a U.S. strike, and has developed several lower-tier air defense systems for 
its own use and export as a foreign policy instrument.   
North Korea. North Korea continues to improve, expand, and diversify its conventional and 
nuclear missile capabilities, posing an increasing risk to the U.S. homeland and U.S. forces in 
theater, as well as regional Allies and partners.  In 2017, North Korea flight-tested two different 
types of domestically-produced road-mobile Intercontinental Ballistic Missiles (ICBM), both of 
which can reach the U.S. homeland.  In 2020, North Korea displayed a new, larger ICBM during 
a military parade.  Additionally, North Korea has a range of domestically-produced missile 
systems, including short-, medium-, and Intermediate-Range Ballistic Missiles (IRBM) that can 
hold deployed U.S. forces, Allies, and partners at risk.  Most of North Korea’s ballistic missiles 
have an assessed capability to carry nuclear payloads.  North Korea has publicly stated its intent 
to continue advancing the size and complexity of its ballistic missile program regardless of future 
U.S. regional or homeland missile defense capabilities or postures.  Additionally, since September 
2021, North Korea has conducted multiple flight tests of what it claims are hypersonic missiles.  
In January 2022, North Korea conducted another series of tests of a variety of missile systems, 
including an IRBM – its first such test since 2017. 
Iran. The Islamic Republic of Iran (Iran) maintains a large and growing regional missile and UAS 
capability, which it leverages (often through proxies) to conduct attacks in the region, ensure 
regime survival, deter attacks against its territory, and respond if attacked.  Iran continues to 
maintain the largest missile force in the Middle East, augmented with a growing UAS capability.  
Its missiles pose a risk to U.S. forces, Allies, and partners in the Middle East and beyond, but 
cannot currently reach the U.S. homeland.  Iran also continues to pursue a space program, which 
could shorten the pathway to a future long-range missile capability. 
Non-State Actors. Non-state actors pose an increasing threat to U.S. regional interests, 
including Allies and partners, particularly in the Middle East and Africa.  On today’s battlefields, 
non-state actors are employing increasingly complex offensive sUAS, rocket, and missile 
capabilities, and continue to benefit from technology transfer by U.S. adversaries. 
UAS. UAS are an inexpensive, accessible, flexible, expendable, and plausibly deniable way to 
carry out armed attacks and project outsized power over a variety of domains.  Accelerating 
technology trends continue to transform applications of UAS, making them increasingly capable 
platforms in the hands of both state and non-state actors.  UAS can have similar lethality to cruise 
 
 
4  
2 0 2 2  M I S S I L E  D E F E N S E  R E V I E W  
missiles and can launch from a wide array of locations, virtually undetected.  UAS are generally 
not perceived by adversaries as having the same destabilizing geostrategic implications as larger 
missile forces, making them an increasingly preferred method to carry out tactical-level 
strikes.  Adversaries also are utilizing multiple types of missile salvos – such as one-way attack 
UAS in combination with rockets – in an effort to defeat missile defense systems.  UAS usage will 
likely expand and continue to pose a threat to U.S. personnel overseas, Allies and partners, and 
potentially to the U.S. homeland. 
 
 
 
5  
2 0 2 2  M I S S I L E  D E F E N S E  R E V I E W  
III. STRATEGY AND POLICY FRAMEWORK 
As outlined in the NDS, integrated deterrence is a framework weaving together all instruments of 
national power – with diplomacy at the forefront – to work seamlessly across warfighting domains, 
theaters, the spectrum of conflict, and our network of alliances and partnerships.  Tailored to 
specific circumstances, integrated deterrence applies a coordinated, multifaceted approach to 
reducing competitors’ perceptions of the net benefits of aggression relative to restraint.  Integrated 
deterrence is enabled by combat-credible forces and backstopped by a safe, secure, and effective 
nuclear deterrent. 
Missile defenses, as one component of this integrated, multilayered framework, are critical to the 
top priority of defending the homeland and deterring attacks against the United States.  Whether 
protecting the homeland, deployed U.S. forces, or our Allies and partners, missile defenses deny 
the benefits of an attack by adversaries and limits damage should deterrence fail. 
The continued evolution and progress of missiles as a principal means by which adversaries seek 
to project conventional or nuclear military power makes missile defense a core deterrence-by-
denial component of an integrated deterrence strategy.  Missile defense capabilities add resilience 
and undermine adversary confidence in missile use by introducing doubt and uncertainty into strike 
planning and execution, reducing the incentive to conduct small-scale coercive attacks, decreasing 
the probability of attack success, and raising the threshold for conflict.  Missile defenses also 
reinforce U.S. diplomatic and security posture to reassure Allies and partners that the United States 
will not be deterred from fulfilling its global security commitments.  In the event of crisis or 
conflict, missile defenses offer military options that help counter the expanding presence of missile 
threats, and may be less escalatory than employing offensive systems.  Damage limitation offered 
by missile defenses expands decision making space for senior leaders at all levels of conflict, and 
preserves capability and freedom of maneuver for U.S. forces. 
Within the framework of integrated deterrence, missile defense and nuclear capabilities are 
complementary.  U.S. nuclear weapons present a credible threat of a robust response and 
overwhelming cost imposition, while missile defenses contribute to deterrence by denial.  If 
deterrence fails, missile defenses can potentially mitigate some effects from an attack.  Missile 
defense contributes directly to tailored U.S. deterrence strategies to dissuade attacks on the United 
States from states like North Korea, and contributes to extended deterrence for U.S. Allies and 
partners, and our respective forces abroad. 
To address intercontinental-range, nuclear threats from Russia and the PRC, the United States will 
continue to rely on strategic deterrence – underwritten by safe, secure, and effective nuclear forces 
– to deter such threats as outlined in the 2022 Nuclear Posture Review (NPR).  Ensuring the 
continued credibility of this deterrent will require investments in missile warning, missile tracking, 
and resilient NC3 to keep pace with the evolving PRC and Russian threats, and avoid the 
possibility of evading U.S. sensor networks in a surprise attack.  For states like North Korea, 
 
 
6  
2 0 2 2  M I S S I L E  D E F E N S E  R E V I E W  
missile defenses and the U.S. nuclear arsenal are complementary and mutually reinforcing, as both 
capabilities contribute to deterring an attack against the United States and our Allies and partners. 
Homeland Missile Defense. The Department’s top priority is to defend the homeland and 
deter attacks against the United States.  For the purposes of this review, homeland missile defense 
refers to the defense of the 50 states, all U.S. territories, and the District of Columbia against 
missile attacks.  Missile defenses can raise the threshold for initiating nuclear conflict by denying 
an aggressor the ability to execute small-scale coercive nuclear attacks or demonstrations.  Further, 
the presence of missile defense complicates adversary decision-making by injecting doubt and 
uncertainty about the likelihood of a successful offensive missile attack. 
Missile defense systems such as the GMD offer a visible measure of protection for the U.S. 
population while reassuring Allies and partners that the United States will not be coerced by threats 
to the homeland from states like North Korea and potentially Iran.  In the event of crisis, globally 
integrated domain awareness capabilities increase warning and allow for flexible decision-making 
to respond, as necessary and appropriate, with escalatory options such as kinetic strike.  Should 
deterrence fail, missile defenses can help mitigate damage to the homeland and help protect the 
U.S. population. 
The U.S. homeland ballistic missile defense architecture centers on the GMD system, consisting 
of interceptors emplaced in Alaska and California, a network of space-based and terrestrial-based 
sensors, and an integrated C2 system.  Together, these U.S. homeland defense capabilities provide 
the means to address ballistic missile threats from states like North Korea and Iran. 
Though the United States maintains the right to defend itself against attacks from any source, GMD 
is neither intended for, nor capable of, defeating the large and sophisticated ICBM, air-, or sea-
launched ballistic missile threats from Russia and the PRC.  The United States relies on strategic 
deterrence to address those threats. 
As part of an integrated approach to deterrence, the United States recognizes the interrelationship 
between strategic offensive arms and strategic defensive systems.  Strengthening mutual 
transparency and predictability with regard to these systems could help reduce the risk of conflict. 
As North Korean ballistic missile threats to the U.S. homeland continue to evolve, the United 
States is committed to improving the capability and reliability of the GMD system.  This includes 
development of the Next Generation Interceptor (NGI) to augment and potentially replace the 
existing Ground-Based Interceptors (GBI).  In addition to the GMD system, the United States will 
leverage and improve its full spectrum of missile defeat capabilities, complemented by the credible 
threat of direct cost imposition through nuclear and non-nuclear means, to continue to counter 
North Korean missile threats to the homeland.  To deter attempts by adversaries to stay under the 
nuclear threshold and achieve strategic results with conventional capabilities, the United States 
will examine active and passive defense measures to decrease the risk from any cruise missile 
strike against critical assets, regardless of origin.  
 
 
7  
2 0 2 2  M I S S I L E  D E F E N S E  R E V I E W  
Within the context of homeland defense, an attack on Guam or any other U.S. territory by any 
adversary will be considered a direct attack on the United States, and will be met with an 
appropriate response.  Additionally, Guam is home to key regional power projection platforms and 
logistical nodes, and is an essential operating base for U.S. efforts to maintain a free and open 
Indo-Pacific region.  The architecture for defense of the territory against missile attacks will 
therefore be commensurate with its unique status as both an unequivocal part of the United States 
as well as a vital regional location.  Guam’s defense, which will include various active and passive 
missile defense capabilities, will contribute to the overall integrity of integrated deterrence and 
bolster U.S. operational strategy in the Indo-Pacific region. 
Regional Missile Defense. The United States will continue to strengthen defenses for U.S. 
forces, and with Allies, and partners against all regional missile threats from any source.  As part 
of an integrated, interoperable, and multi-layered approach to deterrence, IAMD capabilities need 
to keep pace with expanding regional missile threats, while protecting and enabling U.S., Allied, 
and partner maneuver forces to conduct operations. 
Regional missile threats continue to expand in capability, capacity, and complexity, challenging 
existing U.S., Allied, and partner regional IAMD capabilities and placing all at risk.  Likely 
designed for employment below the U.S. nuclear threshold, adversaries are pursuing and 
demonstrating advanced, long-range space and missile systems capable of traversing entire 
Combatant Command Areas of Responsibility (AORs).  Attacks from these systems could 
increasingly blur the line between regional and homeland defense and challenge existing IAMD 
architectures.  In addition to missile threats, U.S. forces, Allies and partners also face the 
proliferation of lower-tier threats (e.g., rockets, armed UAS, etc.) as adversaries seek to take 
advantage of these relatively inexpensive, flexible, and expendable systems while exploiting 
inherent difficulties with attribution and its implications for deterrence. 
Cooperation with like-minded nations is crucial.  The United States will continue to seek ways to 
integrate and interoperate with Allies and partners as well as encouraging greater integration 
among Allies and partners to fill gaps against the increasing spectrum of regional 
threats.  Additionally, as the ability to share sensor information and data is critical to regional 
defense, the United States will continue to streamline processes for information and data sharing, 
while encouraging Allies and partners to enhance their information protection posture and cyber 
security. 
The United States will also continue to develop active and passive defenses against regional 
hypersonic missile threats, and pursue a persistent and resilient sensor network to characterize and 
track all hypersonic threats, improve attribution, and enable engagement.  Acquisition strategies 
for new sensors, interceptors, and C2 systems must be fully aligned – with sensors as the priority.  
As appropriate, the United States will pursue joint research and development on hypersonic 
defense programs with key Allies and partners. 
 
 
8  
2 0 2 2  M I S S I L E  D E F E N S E  R E V I E W  
IAMD. Nested within our broader missile defeat approach, IAMD is the integration of capabilities 
and overlapping operations to defend the homeland, Allies and partners, protect the Joint and 
combined forces, and enable freedom of action by negating an adversary’s ability to create adverse 
effects with air and missile capabilities. 
IAMD represents an effort to move beyond platform-specific missile defense toward a broader 
approach melding all missile defeat capabilities – defensive, passive, offensive, kinetic, non-
kinetic – into a comprehensive joint and combined construct. 
Developing and fielding IAMD systems is a complex problem set.  To address the rapidly evolving 
threat, the acquisition community must continue to exploit adaptive acquisition approaches to 
ensure the timely and cost-effective development, procurement, sustainment, and improvement of 
IAMD systems, while providing a clear investment strategy over the near-, medium-, and long-
terms. 
The Department must develop, design, acquire, and maintain Joint IAMD systems that are 
integrated, interoperable, and sufficiently mobile, flexible, and affordable to protect the homeland 
and dispersed joint and combined maneuver forces from the full spectrum of air and missile threats.  
Interoperability breeds efficiency and economy of resources.  To enhance this effect in IAMD, the 
Department must develop and exercise innovative combinations of Service, national, and Allied 
and partner capabilities to meet mission needs. 
One area of importance related to IAMD is the increasing challenge of counter-UAS (C-UAS).  
UAS are an inexpensive, flexible and plausibly deniable way for adversaries endeavoring to carry 
out tactical-level attacks below the threshold for major response, making them an increasingly 
preferred capability for state and non-state actors alike.  UAS capabilities are also growing in 
variety, quality, and quantity.  The homeland and regionally forward deployed forces require the 
fielding of technical and integrated C-UAS solutions with cross-DoD and interagency 
synchronization to ensure they can meet the range of threats and appropriately hedge against future 
advancements.  Within the homeland, protecting the population from UAS threats is a combined 
interagency mission. 
Future Technologies. The United States requires responsive, persistent, resilient, and cost-
effective joint IAMD sensor capabilities to detect, characterize, track, and engage current and 
emerging advanced air and missile threats regionally, and to improve early warning, identification, 
tracking, discrimination, and attribution for missile threats to the homeland.  Sensors must be 
integrated into a cohesive architecture with increasingly capable C2 in order to provide leaders 
with a maximized decision space for informed actions. 
Sensors should be able to seamlessly transition from theater-level threats, to homeland defense, to 
global threats, by sharing and transmitting data with C2 as threats move in and out of the 
atmosphere.  Because of their global nature, persistence, and greater access to denied regions, 
resilient space-based infrared, radar, and associated data transport systems will be critical to any 
 
 
9  
2 0 2 2  M I S S I L E  D E F E N S E  R E V I E W  
future integrated sensor network.  Likewise, modern over-the-horizon radar capabilities are 
essential to improving warning and tracking against cruise missile and other threats to the 
homeland. 
Advanced sensor capabilities need to facilitate different mission areas simultaneously.  These 
include strategic and theater missile warning and tracking to: alert national leadership and cue 
missile defenses in the event of a missile launch; offer space domain awareness to provide 
indications and warning of threats; support mission assurance of the space architecture; and prompt 
ISR to provide persistent, and often unwarned, global information essential to the whole of 
government.  Therefore, the ability to operate these sensors through common, joint and combined 
all-domain integrated and survivable C2 networks and architectures is paramount.  The United 
States will continue to leverage industry, academia, government, and allied and partner solutions 
to augment existing Department of Defense capabilities and foster rapid future capability 
employment. 
Advanced and innovative technologies and more effective battle management will be crucial to 
moving the United States towards a cost-effective and integrated set of offensive and defensive 
capabilities.  To cope with rapidly increasing adversary development of missile-centric Anti-
Access/Area-Denial (A2/AD) threats, the Department must seek new technologies and hedge 
against continuing adversary missile developments and emerging capabilities such as hypersonic 
weapons, multiple and maneuvering warheads, and missile defense countermeasures.  Future air 
and missile defense capabilities must also be more mobile, flexible, survivable, and affordable, 
and emphasize disaggregation, dispersal, and maneuver to mitigate the threat from adversary 
missiles.  Finally, these technologies and platforms – including those enabling NC3 – must be 
inherently cyber-secure, joined by resilient, redundant and hardened networks, and monitored by 
an agile defensive cyber force operating under a clear, unified C2 construct. 
 
 
 
1 0  
2 0 2 2  M I S S I L E  D E F E N S E  R E V I E W  
IV. STRENGTHENING INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION 
WITH ALLIES AND PARTNERS 
America’s alliances and close partnerships around the world are one of its greatest assets.  Working 
closely with select countries in North America, the Indo-Pacific, Europe, and the Middle East to 
enhance our collective IAMD efforts continues to be an important priority for the United States.  
From a strategic standpoint, cooperation in this area strengthens common protection, enhances 
extended deterrence, and provides assurances essential to the cohesion of our alliances and 
partnerships in the face of growing regional missile threats, coercion and attacks.  Operationally, 
IAMD-related coordination, including in the crucial areas of sensing and tracking threats, plays an 
important role in improving interoperability while mitigating the effectiveness of adversary 
A2/AD capabilities.  To pursue these objectives and goals, the Department of Defense engages 
Allies and partners in extensive bilateral and multilateral IAMD-focused security cooperation 
activities that: coordinate policy development and operational planning; conduct missile defense 
experimentation; share information on regional and global missile threats; exchange operational 
IAMD visions; strengthen and align information protection efforts; support modernization and 
future capability development; and advance new opportunities for joint research, training, and 
collaborative development and production. 
North America. The United States and Canada have worked together in the defense of North 
America for decades.  Over the years, our shared homeland defense concerns have grown more 
acute as adversaries have developed increasingly sophisticated conventional missile capabilities 
that are able to target critical infrastructure in North America.  Through the binational North 
American Aerospace Defense (NORAD) Command, the United States and Canada will continue 
to work together to improve early warning surveillance for potential incursions or attacks 
originating from any direction into North America. 
Indo-Pacific. The pacing challenge posed by the PRC, as well as the growing North Korean 
missile threat, have magnified the importance of collaborative regional air and missile defense 
efforts in the Indo-Pacific region.  To counter these threats, the U.S. conducts missile defense 
cooperation with Allies and partners throughout the region, which is strongest with Japan, 
Australia, and the Republic of Korea (ROK).  Our cooperation with these countries strengthens 
collective regional deterrence and defense efforts while offering assurances critical to the unity of 
our alliances.  Japan, Australia and the ROK practice and signal their respective defensive military 
capabilities through sustained investment in air and missile defense systems, as well as 
participation in regular exercises and training with the United States.  We will continue to work 
closely with these Allies and partners, encouraging them to pursue ground- and space-based sensor 
systems for warning and tracking, and exploring joint opportunities to invest in the cooperative 
development of complementary IAMD technologies and capabilities such as hypersonic defenses 
to address advanced and increasingly diverse air and missile threats. 
 
 
1 1  
2 0 2 2  M I S S I L E  D E F E N S E  R E V I E W  
Europe. The United States works multilaterally within NATO and also cooperates bilaterally 
with specific NATO and non-NATO countries in Europe to counter air and missile threats from 
potential adversaries. 
NATO IAMD addresses cruise and ballistic missile threats in a 360-degree defense, encompassing 
a mixture of lower-tier air and missile defenses (e.g., PATRIOT, National Advanced Surface-to-
Air Missile System (NASAMS), Surface-to-Air Missile Platform/Terrain (SAMP/T)).  NATO 
IAMD is an essential and continuous mission in peacetime, crisis, and times of conflict, which 
contributes to deterrence and defense, and the indivisible security and freedom of action of the 
Alliance, including NATO's capability to reinforce, and to provide a strategic response.  NATO 
has enhanced its IAMD mission and taken steps to improve NATO IAMD forces’ readiness and 
responsiveness in peacetime, crisis, and times of conflict – strengthening our ability to ensure that 
all necessary measures are implemented for the security of the Alliance. 
The NATO Ballistic Missile Defense (NATO BMD) system defends European NATO territory 
from ballistic missiles originating from outside the Euro-Atlantic region.  These efforts include a 
voluntary U.S. national contribution to the NATO BMD system, the European Phased Adaptive 
Approach (EPAA).  EPAA includes an AN/TPY-2 radar based in Turkey, one Aegis Ashore site 
in Romania, one Aegis Ashore site under construction in Poland, plus Aegis BMD capable ships 
homeported in Spain. 
The United States will continue to work closely with its NATO Allies and other European partners 
to strengthen both NATO IAMD and NATO BMD through improved readiness and preparedness, 
greater integration and coherence, multilateral and bilateral exercises, Foreign Military Sales, and 
international armaments cooperation initiatives where applicable. 
Middle East. The United States has a long history of working with Israel and other partners in 
the Middle East to counter air and missile threats.  With Israel, we have a longstanding relationship 
of robust cooperation on missile defense.  The United States also has strong bilateral air and missile 
defense cooperation with many Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) states, including the United Arab 
Emirates (UAE) and Saudi Arabia, as well as collectively with GCC itself, that includes regular 
engagements with air and missile defense forces in support of operational activities.  An ongoing, 
longer-term goal with the GCC and other regional states is to establish a network of air and missile 
defense capabilities across the Middle East to facilitate greater cooperation while bolstering 
defense through a layered approach.  Ongoing normalization efforts between Israel and key Arab 
states provide additional opportunities to strengthen regional air defenses given shared missile and 
UAS threats. 
 
 
 
1 2  
2 0 2 2  M I S S I L E  D E F E N S E  R E V I E W  
V. CONCLUSION 
The evolution of offensive air and missile threats has accelerated greatly since the United States 
began developing its first ballistic missile defense systems over fifty years ago.  This trend 
represents a growing national security challenge expected to multiply in scope and complexity 
over the coming decade.  To meet these challenges, U.S. IAMD posture must be comprehensive, 
layered, mobile, and ready to degrade, disrupt, and defeat adversary missiles at every opportunity 
and in all phases of flight, and include evolving warfighting concepts that emphasize dispersal and 
maneuver to ensure resilience in contested environments.  To be most effective, it must also be 
integrated and interoperable with Allies and partners, and underpinned with increasingly robust 
domain awareness capabilities within a pliable missile defense network. 
As a proven capability within an integrated deterrence approach, active and passive missile 
defenses remain essential elements in the suite of solutions against advanced and changing threats 
to the United States, and its Allies and partners.  It is a strategic imperative for the United States 
to continue investments and innovation in the development of full spectrum missile defeat 
capabilities in order to maintain deterrence and offer protection, while hedging against uncertainty. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
